The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Works of Thomas Middleton: Volume 1
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Works of Thomas Middleton: Volume 1

Author: Thomas C. Middleton

Editor: Alexander Dyce

Release date: March 27, 2025 [eBook #75603]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Edward Lumley, 1840

Credits: Tim Lindell, KD Weeks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THOMAS MIDDLETON: VOLUME 1 ***


------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_. Superscripted
letters are indicated with ‘^’ or, if multiple characters are involved,
‘^{abc}’.

All footnotes have been moved to the end of the text. A number of
lengthy notes spanned multiple pages, and the segments are gathered
together here. Footnotes were lettered ‘a’ to ‘z’, repeating the
pattern. They have been resequenced numerically to ensure uniqueness
across the text. On occasion, when a note is referred to in another
note by its superscripted letter, the new number is substituted.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

This volume includes an “ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA” which hold editorial
notes for all volumes of this series. The relevant portions of this
section will be copied to the Transcriber’s end note for each of the
succeeding volumes for ease of reference.

                               THE WORKS
                                   OF
                           THOMAS MIDDLETON.

                             --------------

                                VOL. I.

                               CONTAINING

                    THE OLD LAW.
                    THE MAYOR OF QUEENBOROUGH.
                    BLURT, MASTER-CONSTABLE.
                    THE PHŒNIX.
                    MICHAELMAS TERM.




                                LONDON:

                PRINTED BY ROBSON, LEVEY, AND FRANKLYN,
                         46 St. Martin’s Lane.

[Illustration:

  _Vera Effigies_
  _Tho. Midletoni Gent._
]

                               THE WORKS

                                   OF

                           THOMAS MIDDLETON,

                        =Now first collected,=

                                  WITH

                      SOME ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR,

                                  AND

                                 NOTES,

                                   BY

                      THE REVEREND ALEXANDER DYCE.










                           _IN FIVE VOLUMES._

                                VOL. I.

                             --------------

                                LONDON:

                     EDWARD LUMLEY, CHANCERY LANE.

                                  ---

                                 1840.

                                   TO

                        JOHN PAYNE COLLIER, ESQ.

                            =These Volumes=

                             ARE INSCRIBED

                                   BY

                        HIS VERY SINCERE FRIEND,

                                   ALEXANDER DYCE.




                                PREFACE.


All the surviving works of Middleton are comprehended in the present
volumes; and though, perhaps, to a certain class of readers, a selection
from his writings might have been more acceptable, I am confident that
the entire series is requisite to satisfy the lovers of our early
literature.

So rare are some of the pieces now reprinted, that they were not to be
obtained without considerable difficulty. The original quartos of _The
Triumphs of Integrity_, and _The Triumphs of Honour and Industry_, are
nowhere to be found but in the dramatic library of the Duke of
Devonshire; and I beg leave respectfully to express my sense of his
Grace’s liberality and kindness, in granting me permission to transcribe
them.

An obligation, for which I am truly grateful, has been conferred upon me
by the Rev. Joseph Hunter, whose intimate acquaintance with the
genealogical collections of the British Museum enabled him to point out
to me a most important document, which had escaped my notice—the
pedigree of Middleton in one of the Harleian MSS.

To Charles George Young, Esq., York Herald, who readily assisted my
researches at the College of Arms; and to Henry Woodthorpe, Esq., town-
clerk of London, who with equal good will rendered me the same services
at Guildhall, I have to return my sincere thanks.

To Sir Harris Nicolas, John Payne Collier, Esq., the Rev. John Mitford,
and the Rev. Stephen Reay, sub-librarian of the Bodleian Library, I have
to acknowledge myself indebted for a variety of useful communications.

                                                     ALEXANDER DYCE.

   GRAY’S INN,
  _December 1839_.




                              SOME ACCOUNT
                                   OF
                        MIDDLETON AND HIS WORKS.

                             --------------

Thomas Middleton[1] is seldom mentioned by his contemporaries; and to
the scanty materials for his biography already collected by the
curiosity of antiquarian writers, the facts which I have been enabled to
add, though important, are unfortunately few.

His father was William Middleton; concerning whom I have found no
earlier notice than is contained in the following document, which
affords unquestionable evidence that he was a gentleman by birth:

“To all and singuler as well Noblez and gentlemen as others to whome
these presentz shall coome I Sir Gilberte Dethicke knyghte alias Garter
principall kinge of armes sende greatinge in owre Lord god euerlasting,
Forasmuche as anncientlye from the begynninge the valiant and vertius
actes of wourthie parsons haue ben commended to the world and posteretie
with sondrie monumentz and remembrances of there good desearttes Emongst
the which the chefiste and most vsuall hath ben the bearinge of signes
and tokens in shildes called Armes which are euident demonstracions of
prowez and valoure diuerslie distributed according to the qualities and
wourthines of the parsons demereting the same which order as it was
prudentlie devised in the beginnynge to stirre and kindle the harttes of
men to the ymytacion of vertue and noblenes Euen so hathe the same ben
and yet is contynnuallie obseruid to the [end] that suche as haue don
commendable seruice to their prince or contrey eyther in warre or peace
may bothe receiue due honor in their liues and also leaue the same
successiuelie vnto there posteritie after them And wheras therfore
William Midleton of        in the Countie of        [2] gentleman hathe
ben of longe time one of the bearrers of these Armes That is to say
Argent on a Saulteir engrailed sablez a Castle of the firste And for
asmuch as I finde no Creaste therevnto belonging or appertayninge hath
requested me the sayd Garter to assigne vnto his coot armoure such
creaste or Cognissance as he may lawfullie vse and beare In
consideracion wherof and for a further declaration of the wourthines of
the sayd William I the sayd Garter kinge of Armes haue assigned vnto him
this creast or cognissance folowinge That is to say on his Torce argent
and sables a Ape passant with a coller about his necke and chaine golde
mantelled argent double gules as more playnlie appeareth depicted in
this margent Which Armes and Creast I the sayd Garter principall Kinge
of Armes haue ratefied confermed assigned and allowed and by these
presentes do ratefye confirme assigne and allow vnto the sayd William
Mydleton and to his posteritie for ever and he and they to haue hould
and enioy the same and therin to be revested att his and there libertie
and pleasure without the lett ympediment or interruption of any other
parson or parsons whatsoeuer In wittnes whereof I the sayd Garter haue
signed these presentes with my hand and sett therevnto the seall of myne
office and armes Dated the xxiiiᵗʰ of Aprill in the xᵗʰ yeare of the
Raigne of our moste gracius soueraigne Ladie Elizabeth by the grace of
godd of England France and Ireland Quene Defender of the fayth &c Anno
1560 [1568].”[3]

William Middleton appears to have settled in the metropolis.[4] He
married[5] Anne, daughter of William Snow, of London; and by her had two
children,—Thomas, the subject of the present memoir; and Avicia,[6] who
first became the wife of John Empson, of London, and afterwards of Alan
Waterer, of the same city.

The date of the poet’s birth, which is matter of conjecture,[7] I am
inclined to fix not earlier than 1570.

It was probably about 1603 that he married Maria,[8] daughter of Edward
Morbeck,[9] of London, one of the Six Clerks of Chancery, by Barbara,
daughter of William Palmer, of Warwickshire. A son, named Edward, the
only issue of this marriage, was alive in 1623, aged nineteen. If there
be no error in the MS. from which the above information has been
derived, and if the entry among the City Records, which is cited in
another part of this memoir, be also correct, Middleton must have
married a second time, either during 1623 or subsequently to that year,
for, according to the latter authority, the name of his widow was
Magdalen.

A “Tho. Middleton” was admitted member of Gray’s Inn in 1593, a second
in 1596, and a third in 1606.[10] Of these individuals, the first is
more likely than either of the others to have been the dramatist.

_The Wisdom of Solomon Paraphrased, Written by Thomas Middleton_, 1597,
has generally been assigned to our author; and since no other poet of
the same name is known to have existed in those days,[11] I have thought
myself obliged, notwithstanding its length and tediousness, to reprint
it entire. _Micro-cynicon, Six Snarling Satires_, 1599, has also been
attributed to him, because the prefatory verses are subscribed “T. M.
Gent.;” and as it possesses at least the doubtful merit of shortness, I
have not rejected it from the present collection.[12]

But of whatever kind were his earliest (and perhaps unsuccessful)
efforts to attract the notice of the public, it is evident that
Middleton devoted the maturity of his powers almost exclusively to
dramatic composition, though the period at which he commenced a writer
for the stage cannot be determined. There are grounds for believing that
_The Old Law_ was first produced in 1599.[13] Of that play, a portion
only is by him—a portion is by William Rowley; and subsequently it
received improvements from the pen of Massinger, who when it was
originally acted had not completed his fifteenth year. The reader ought
to remember, that dramas which bear on their title-pages the names of
more than one author were not necessarily written by those authors in
conjunction: that popular playwrights were often employed to alter and
to add to pieces which had ceased to be attractive, is a fact
sufficiently established by the valuable memoranda of Henslowe. We are
not, however, to conclude that the other dramas of which Middleton was
only in part the author were wrought into their present form by such a
process.

It is unnecessary to enumerate all the various pieces with which, during
a long series of years, he continued to enrich the stage; nor would it
be possible to ascertain the exact order in which they were produced.
Henslowe’s papers supply the following notices of two which perhaps were
never printed, and are no longer extant:

  “May 1602. Two Harpies, by Dekker, Drayton, Middleton, Webster, and
    Mundy.”[14]

  “Oct. 1602. Randall, earl of Chester, by T. Middleton.”[15]

And among the MS. plays which belonged to Warburton the Somerset Herald,
and which, according to his own cool statement, “were unluckely burnd or
put under Pye-bottoms,” there was one entitled “The Puritan Maid, the
Modest Wife, and the Wanton Widow, by Tho. Middleton.”[16]

Two tracts, which issued separately from the press in 1604, _The Black
Book_, and _Father Hubburd’s Tales, or The Ant and the Nightingale_, I
assign, with little hesitation, to Middleton: in both the Epistle to the
Reader is subscribed “T. M.,” and in both are found expressions which
remind us strongly of his dramatic dialogue. They are coarse but
humorous attacks on the vices and follies of the time; and are
peculiarly interesting on account of the passages which relate to Thomas
Nash,[17] of whose admirable prose-satires they may be considered as no
unhappy imitations. The verses interwoven with _Father Hubburd’s Tales_
are occasionally very graceful.

_The Inner Temple Masque_, written, I apprehend, in 1618, and _The World
tost at Tennis_, first produced as a royal entertainment, and afterwards
brought out with alterations, probably in 1620, are the only pieces of
the kind which we possess from our author’s pen; but it appears, by an
entry in the City Records, that he had been called on at an earlier date
to compose a masque, of which the title alone remains:

                          “Martis xviii die Januarii 1613 Anno R.Rs
                          Jacobi Angliæ &c. undecimo.

   Middleton Mayor.     Item: it is ordered by this Court that Thomas
  Rep. No. 31. (Part  Middleton Gent. shalbe forthwith allowed upon his
   Sec.) fol. 239.ᵇ   Bill of particulers such recompence and chardges
                      as the Committees lately appointed for the
                      ordering of the late Solempnities at
                      Marchauntailors Hall shall thinck meete for all
                      his disbursements and paynes taken by him and
                      others in the last _Mask of Cupid_ and other
                      Shewes lately made at the aforesaid Hall by the
                      said Mʳ Middleton.”

The “solempnities” in question had been occasioned by the recent
nuptials of that infamous pair the Earl and Countess of Somerset, and
are thus described by Howes: “Vpon Tewsday the 4. of January [1613-14],
the Bride and Bridegroome, being accompanied with the duke of Lenox, the
Lord priuie Seale, the lord Chamberlayne, the earles of Worcester,
Pembroke, Mountgomery, and others, and with many honorable Barons,
knights, and gentlemen of qualitie, came to marchant-taylers hall, where
the Lord Maior and Aldermenne of London, in their Scarlet robes,
entertayned them with hearty welcome, and feasted them with all
magnificence: at their first entrance into the hall, they were receiued
with ingenious speeches and pleasant melody: at this princely feast all
the meate was serued to the Table by choyse cittizens of comeliest
personage, in their gownes of rich Foynes, selected out of the 12.
honorable companies: after supper, and being risen from the Table, these
noble guests were entertayned with a Wassaile, 2. seuerall pleasant
maskes, and a play, and with other pleasant dances, all which being
ended, then the Bride and Bridegroome with all the rest were inuited to
a princely banquet, and about 3. a clock in the morning they returned to
Whitehall.”[18]

Middleton’s earliest[19] pageant was produced in 1613; and his ingenuity
was again taxed to devise fantastic shows for the amusement of the
populace in 1616, 1617, and 1619.

Among the expenses of the pageant for 1617, _The Triumphs of Honour and
Industry_,[20] which have been printed from the accounts of the Wardens
of the Grocers’ Company, are the following entries:

                                                          £.   _s._ _d._

 “Payde to Thomas Middleton, gent. for the ordering,
   over seeing and writyng of the whole devyse, for the
   making of the Pageant of Nations, the Iland, the
   Indian Chariot, the Castle of Fame, trymming the
   Shipp, with all the several beastes which drew them,
   and for all the carpenter’s work, paynting, guylding
   and garnyshing of them, with all other things
   necessary for the apparelling and finding of all the
   personages in the sayd shewes, and for all the
   portage and carryage, both by land and by water, for
   the lighters for the shew by water, for paynting of a
   banner of the Lord Mayor’s armes, and also in full
   for the greenmen, dyvells and fyer works with all
   thinges thereunto belonging according to his
   agreement, the some of                                  282   0 0

 “Payde to Nicholas Oaks, stationer, for the printyng of
   500 bookes, the some of                                   4   0 0”[21]

Partly, perhaps, in consequence of the satisfaction afforded by these
and other performances, he was appointed, in 1620, Chronologer to the
City of London, and Inventor of its “honourable entertainments.” Such,
at least, is the date of his election according to the authority cited
below[22] by Oldys; and in the extracts from the City Records with which
I have been furnished, I find no mention of his having held the office
anterior to that year:

                            “Martis vicesimo tertio die Januarii 1620
                          Annoque R.R. Jacobi Angliæ &c decimo octavo.

 Jhones Mayor. Rep.     Item: this day uppon consideracion taken by
 No. 35. f. 76.       this Court of the peticion of Thomas Middleton
                      Gentⁿ this Court is well pleased to order that
                      his yearely fee of sixe poundes thirteene
                      shillings and foure pence payable out of the
                      Chamber of London shall from henceforth be
                      encreased to Tenne poundes per annum duringe the
                      pleasure of this Court  And the first quarters
                      payment to be made at our Ladye daye next.”

                            “Martis decimo septimo die Aprilis 1621
                          Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi Angliæ &c decimo
                          nono.

 Jhones Mayor. Rep.     Item: this day uppon the humble peticion of
 No. 35. f. 148.      Thomas Middleton Chronologer and Inventor of the
                      hoᵇˡᵉ entertainments of this Citty this Court is
                      pleased for and towardes his expences in the
                      performances thereof to graunt unto him the
                      nominacion and benefitt of one persone to be made
                      free of this Citty by redempcion, the same
                      persone beinge first presented and allowed of by
                      this Court, and to be one of the nomber of ten to
                      be now made free at this Easter and payinge to
                      Mr. Chamberlen to the Citties use the some of
                      sixe shillings and eight pence.”

                            “Martis decimo septimo die Septembris 1622
                          Annoque R. Regis Jacobi &c vicesimo.

 Barkham Mayor. Rep.    Item: this day uppon the humble peticion of
 No. 36. f. 249.      Thomas Middleton the Cittyes Chronologer This
                      Courte is pleased for his better incouragement to
                      order that Mr. Chamberlen shall pay unto him the
                      some of fifteene poundes as of the guifte of this
                      Courte.”

                            “Jovis sexto die Februarii 1622 Annoque
                          R.Rs Jacobi Angliæ &c vicesimo.

 Proby Mayor. Rep.      Item: this day uppon the humble peticion of
 No. 37. f. 95.       Thomas Middleton the Citties Chronologer this
                      Court is pleased to take into their consideracion
                      the services of the saide peticioner expressed in
                      his peticion and thereupon to order that Mr.
                      Chamberlen shall pay unto him the some of Twenty
                      poundes as of the guifte of this Court.”

                            “Jovis vicesimo quarto die Aprilis 1623
                          Annoque R.Rs Jacobi Angliæ &c vicesimo primo.

 Proby Mayor. Rep. N.   Item: this daye upon the humble peticion of
 37. f. 151.^b        Thomas Middleton the Citties Chronologer and for
                      his better incouragement to doe his best service
                      to this Cittye this Court of theire especial
                      favour doth graunt unto him the nominacion and
                      benefit of one person to bee made free of this
                      Cittie by redempcion the same beinge first
                      presented and allowed of by this Court and
                      payinge to Mr. Chamberlen to the Citties use the
                      some of vis. viiid.

                            “Martis secundo die Septembris 1623 Annoque
                          R.Rs Jacobi Angliæ &c xxi^o.

 Proby Mayor. Rep.      Item: this daie upon the humble peticion of
 No. 37. f. 240.      Thomas Middleton gent. the Citties Chronologer
                      this Court vouchsaved to order that Mr.
                      Chamberlen shall paie unto him the some of
                      Twentie Markes of the guifte of this Court for
                      and towardes the charges of the service latelie
                      performed by him att the shuting at Bunhill
                      before the Lord Maior and Aldermen and for his
                      service to be performed att the Conduitt heades.”

With the representation of _A Game at Chess_ in 1624 is connected the
most memorable incident of our poet’s history. In this singular drama he
ventured to bring upon the stage both the English and the Spanish court;
much of the satire being levelled at Gondomar, who is unmercifully held
up to ridicule not only for his political intrigues, but even for his
bodily infirmities. “Prince Charles,” says Mr. Collier, “returned from
Spain, after the breaking off the match with the Infanta, late in the
autumn of 1623; and to take advantage of the popular feeling upon this
question, Middleton’s play was probably written in the succeeding
spring, and certainly acted at the Globe in the summer.”[23] _A Game at
Chess_ could hardly fail to prove attractive; and it had already been
performed (as the 4tos state) “for nine days together,” when the
exhibition was suddenly prohibited by a royal mandate, and both the
author and the actors were cited before the Privy Council. A detail of
the proceedings in this curious affair is supplied by the following
letters.

Mr. Secretary Conway to the Privy Council:

“May it please your Lordships,—His Majesty hath received information
from the Spanish Ambassador of a very scandalous comedy acted publickly
by the King’s players, wherein they take the boldness and presumption,
in a rude and dishonourable fashion, to represent on the stage the
persons of his Majesty, the King of Spain, the Conde de Gondomar, the
Bishop of Spalato, &c. His Majesty remembers well there was a
commandment and restraint given against the representing of any modern
Christian kings in those stage-plays; and wonders much both at the
boldness now taken by that company, and also that it hath been permitted
to be so acted, and that the first notice thereof should be brought to
him by a foreign ambassador, while so many ministers of his own are
thereabouts, and cannot but have heard of it. His Majesty’s pleasure is,
that your Lordships presently call before you as well the poet that made
the comedy as the comedians that acted it: And upon examination of them
to commit them, or such of them as you shall find most faulty, unto
prison, if you find cause, or otherwise take security for their
forthcoming; and then certify his Majesty what you find that comedy to
be, in what points it is most offensive, by whom it was made, by whom
licensed, and what course you think fittest to be held for the examplary
and severe punishment of the present offenders, and to restrain such
insolent and licentious presumption for the future. This is the charge I
have received from his Majesty, and with it I make bold to offer to your
Lordships the humble service of, &c. From Rufford, August 12^{th},
1624.”

The Privy Council to Mr. Secretary Conway:

“After our hearty commendations, &c.—According to his Majesty’s pleasure
signified to this board by your letter of the 12^{th} August, touching
the suppressing of a scandalous comedy acted by the King’s players, we
have called before us some of the principal actors and demanded of them
by what license and authority they have presumed to act the same; in
answer whereto they produced a book being an original and perfect copy
thereof (as they affirmed) seen and allowed by Sir Henry Herbert Knᵗ,
Master of the Revels, under his own hand, and subscribed in the last
page of the said book: We demanding further, whether there were not
other parts or passages represented on the stage than those expressly
contained in the book, they confidently protested, they added or varied
from the same nothing at all. The poet, they tell us, is one Middleton,
who shifting out of the way, and not attending the board with the rest,
as was expected, we have given warrant to a messenger for the
apprehending of him. To those that were before us we gave a sound and
sharp reproof, making them sensible of his Majesty’s high displeasure
herein, giving them straight charge and commands that they presumed not
to act the said comedy any more, nor that they suffered any play or
interlude whatsoever to be acted by them or any of their company until
his Majesty’s pleasure be further known. We have caused them likewise to
enter into bond for their attendance upon the board whensoever they
shall be called. As for our certifying to his Majesty (as was intimated
by your letter) what passages in the said comedy we should find to be
offensive and scandalous; We have thought it our duties for his
Majesty’s clearer information to send herewithal the book itself
subscribed as aforesaid by the Master of the Revels, that so either
yourself or some other whom his Majesty shall appoint to peruse the
same, may see the passages themselves out of the original, and call Sir
Henry Herbert before you to know a reason of his licensing thereof, who
(as we are given to understand) is now attending at court; So having
done as much as we conceived agreeable with our duties in conformity to
his Majesty’s royal commandments, and that which we hope shall give him
full satisfaction, we shall continue our humble prayers to Almighty God
for his health and safety; and bid you very heartily farewell. [Dated
the 21st of August, 1624.]”

Mr. Secretary Conway to the Privy Council:

“Right Honourable,—His Majesty having received satisfaction in your
Lordships’ endeavours, and in the signification thereof to him by yours
of the 21st of this present, hath commanded me to signify the same to
you. And to add further, that his pleasure is, that your Lordships
examine by whose direction and application the personating of Gondomar
and others was done; and that being found out, the party or parties to
be severely punished, his Majesty being unwilling for one’s sake and
only fault to punish the innocent or utterly to ruin the company. The
discovery on what party his Majesty’s justice is properly and duly to
fall, and your execution of it and the account to be returned thereof,
his Majesty leaves to your Lordships’ wisdoms and care. And this being
that I have in charge, continuing the humble offer of my service and
duty to the attendance of your commandments, &c. From Woodstock, the
27th August, 1624.”

The preceding correspondence was originally printed by the late George
Chalmers:[24] the following “Letter to the Lords of the Counsell from my
Lord Chamberlain about the Players,” indorsed “27 August 1624,” is now
for the first time published.[25]

“To the right honᵇˡᵉ my very good Lord, the Lord Viscount Maundeville,
Lord President of his Majesty’s most honᵇˡᵉ Privy Counsell, theis.

My very good Lord

Complaynt being made unto his Majesty against the Company of his
Comedians, for acting publiquely a Play knowne by the name of a Game at
Chesse, contayning some passages in it reflecting in matter of scorne
and ignominy upon the King of Spaine, some of his Ministers and others
of good note and quality, his Majesty out of the tender regard hee had
of that King’s honor and those of his Ministers who were conceived to
bee wounded thereby, caused his letters to bee addressed to my Lords and
the rest of his most honᵇˡᵉ Privy Council, thereby requiring them to
convent those his Comedians before them, and to take such course with
them for this offence as might give best satisfaction to the Spanish
Ambassador and to their owne Honnors. After examination that honᵇˡᵉ
Board thought fitt not onely to interdict them playing of that play, but
of any other also, untill his Majesty should give way unto them. And for
their obedience hereunto they weare bound in 300^{li} bondes. Which
punishment when they had suffered (as his Majesty conceives) a competent
tyme, upon their petition delivered heere unto him, it pleased his
Majesty to comaund mee to lett your Lordship understand (which I pray
your Lordship to impart to the rest of that honᵇˡᵉ Board) that his
Majesty now conceives the punishment, if not satisfactory for that their
insolency, yet such as since it stopps the current of their poore
livelyhood and mainteanance, without much prejudice they cannot longer
undergoe. In consideration therefore of those his poore servants, his
Majesty would have their Lordships connive at any common play lycensed
by authority, that they shall act as before. As for this of the Game at
Chesse, that it bee not onely antiquated and sylenced, but the Players
bound as formerly they weare, and in that point onely never to act it
agayne. Yet nothwithstanding that my Lords proceed in their disquisition
to fynd out the originall roote of this offence, whether it sprang from
the Poet, Players, or both, and to certefy his Majesty accordingly. And
so desireing your Lordship to take this into your consideration, and
them into your care, I rest

                                       Yoʳ Loᵖˢ most affectionate
                                                Cousin to serve you,
                                                          PEMBROKE.”

An entry in the Council-register of the 30th August, 1624, declares:
“This day Edward [Thomas] Middleton of London, gent. being formerly sent
for by warrant from this board, tendred his appearance, wherefor his
indemnitie is here entered into the register of counceil causes:
nevertheless he is enjoyned to attend the board till he be discharged by
order of their Lordships.”[26]

A copy of _A Game at Chess_, which formerly belonged to Major Pearson,
contains, in an old hand, the following memorandum:[27]

“After nyne dayse wherein I have heard some of the acters say they tooke
fiveteene hundred Pounde the Spanish faction being prevalent gott it
supprest the chiefe actors and the Poett Mr. Thomas Middleton that writt
it committed to prisson where hee lay some Tyme and at last gott oute
upon this petition presented to King James

          A harmles game: coynd only for delight
          was playd betwixt the black house and the white
          the white house wan: yet still the black doth bragg
          they had the power to put mee in the bagge
          use but your royall hand. Twill set mee free
          Tis but removing of a man thats mee.”

The writer is doubtless mistaken as to the amount of money received at
the doors of the theatre.[28] What he states concerning the imprisonment
of Middleton, &c. seems to be disproved by the authentic documents
already given; and Mr. Collier (who has not noticed the latter part of
the memorandum) remarks, that “the reason why no punishment [except the
interdiction from acting] was inflicted, either upon the players or
poet, was perhaps that they had acted the piece under the authority of
the Master of the Revels.”[29]

In a letter by Howel from Madrid, addressed to Sir John North, there is
an evident allusion to Middleton’s notorious drama: “I am sorry to hear
how other Nations do much tax the English of their Incivility to public
Ministers of State; and what Ballads and Pasquils and Fopperies and
Plays were made against Gondamar for doing his Masters business.”[30]
And in _The Staple of News_, by Ben Jonson, acted 1625, may be found a
humorous but rather gross passage about Gondomar and “the poor English
play was writ of him.”[31]

_The Triumphs of Health and Prosperity_, 1626, was the last piece
composed by Middleton for the entertainment of the city; and it was
also, perhaps, the last effort of his pen.

That in 1623 he resided at Newington Butts,[32] has been already shewn;
and that there he died, is proved by an entry which I now cite from the
Register of the parish-church;

                             “In Julye 1627
            Mr. Thomas Middleton was buried the ... 4[th].”

The following lines have been frequently adduced as a testimony that our
author was far advanced in years at the time of his decease; but I have
little doubt that they are the invention of Chetwood, who on other
occasions is known to have been a most expert and impudent forger:

            “Tom Middleton his numerous issue brings,
            And his last Muse delights us when she sings;
            His halting age a pleasure doth impart,
            And his white locks shew Master of his Art.”[33]

Middleton appears to have left no will; nor is it likely that he had any
property to bequeath, since, some months after his death, a petition for
pecuniary assistance was addressed by his widow to the City:

                          “Jovis septimo die Februarii 1627 [-8] Anno
                          RRs Caroli Angliæ &c. tertio.

   Hamersly Mayor.    Item: this daie upon the humble peticion of
 Rep. No. 42. f. 89.  Magdalen[34] Middleton Widdowe late Wife of
                      Thomas Middleton deceased late Chronologer of
                      this Cittie it is ordered by this Court that Mr.
                      Chamberlen shall paie unto her as of the guifte
                      of this Court the some of Twentie Nobles.”[35]

The Register above cited contains an entry which in all probability
refers to her:

                               “July 1628
               “Mrs. Midelton buried the ... xviii day.”

Concerning the poet’s son Edward, who, as we have seen[36] was aged
nineteen in 1623, I have not succeeded in obtaining any further
particulars.

The portrait of Middleton (without the engraver’s name) prefixed to _Two
New Playes_, 1657, and copied for the present work, is the only one
extant; but whether it conveys a true idea of his personal appearance,
cannot be determined.

Malone informs us, that “Drayton has commended Middleton;”[37] and
though I have searched in vain for the eulogy to which he alludes, it
may nevertheless exist. I shall here throw together the few notices of
our author by his contemporaries which I have been able to collect.

In Howes’s Continuation of Stow’s _Annales_, 1615, he is included in a
list of the Elizabethan poets, which, because I do not remember to have
seen it formerly quoted, I subjoin entire:

“Our moderne and present excellent Poets which worthely florish in their
owne workes, and all of them in my owne knowledge liued togeather in
this Queenes raigne, according to their priorities as neere as I could,
I haue orderly set downe (viz.) George Gascoigne Esquire, Thomas Church-
yard Esquire, sir Edward Dyer knight, Edmond Spencer Esquire, sir Philip
Sidney knight, Sir John Harrington knight, Sir Thomas Challoner knight,
Sir Frauncis Bacon knight, and Sir John Dauie[s] knight, Master John
Lillie gentleman, Maister George Chapman gentleman, M. W. Warner
gentleman, M. Willi. Shakespeare gentleman, Samuell Daniell Esquire,
Michaell Draiton Esquire, of the bath, M. Christopher Marlo gen. M.
Beniamine Johnson gentleman, John Marston Esquier, M. Abraham Frauncis
[Fraunce] gen. master Frauncis Meers gentle. master Josua Siluester
gentle. master Thomas Deckers gentleman, M. John Flecher gentle. M. John
Webster gentleman, M. Thomas Heywood gentleman, M. Thomas Middelton
gentleman, M. George Withers. These following were Latine Poets. Master
Gaulter Hadon gentleman, Master Nicholas Carr gentleman, M. Christopher
Ocland gentle. Mathew Gwynn doctor of Phisicke, Thomas Lodge doctor of
phisike, M. Tho. Watson gentle. Thomas Campion doctor of Phisicke,
Richard Lateware doctor of diuinitie, M. Brunswerd gentleman, Master
doctor Haruie, and master Willey gentleman.”[38]

In the record of Jonson’s “Conversations at Hawthornden in 1619,” our
poet is thus contemptuously mentioned: “That Markam (who added his
English Arcadia) was not of the number of the Faithfull, _i. e._
_Poets_, and but a base fellow. That such were Day and Middleton.”[39]
There can be no doubt that Ben was strongly possessed by the humour of
disparaging, when he chose to couple Middleton with writers so inferior.

In _The Praise of Hempseed_, 1620, by Taylor the water-poet, these lines
occur:

          “And many there are liuing at this day
          Which doe in paper their true worth display:
          As Dauis, Drayton, and the learned Dun,
          Johnson, and Chapman, Marston, Middleton,
          With Rowley, Fletcher, Withers, Massinger,
          Heywood, and all the rest where e’re they are,
          Must say their lines but for the paper sheete
          Had scarcely ground whereon to set their feete.”[40]

In _The Hierarchie of the blessed Angels_, 1635, by Heywood, there is a
curious passage concerning the disrespectful curtailment of the
baptismal names of modern poets, which will probably be new to many
readers:

     “Greene, who had in both Academies ta’ne
     Degree of Master, yet could neuer gaine
     To be call’d more than Robin: who had he
     Profest ought saue the Muse, serv’d, and been free
     After a seuen-yeares Prentiseship, might haue
     (With credit too) gone Robert to his graue.
     Marlo, renown’d for his rare art and wit,
     Could ne’re attaine beyond the name of Kit;
     Although his Hero and Leander did
     Merit addition rather. Famous Kid
     Was call’d but Tom. Tom Watson, though he wrote
     Able to make Apollo’s selfe to dote
     Vpon his Muse, for all that he could striue,
     Yet neuer could to his full name arriue.
     Tom Nash (in his time of no small esteeme)
     Could not a second syllable redeeme.
     Excellent Bewmont, in the formost ranke
     Of the rar’st Wits, was neuer more than Franck.
     Mellifluous Shakespeare, whose inchanting Quill
     Commanded Mirth or Passion, was but Will.
     And famous Johnson, though his learned Pen
     Be dipt in Castaly, is still but Ben.
     Fletcher and Webster, of that learned packe
     None of the mean’st, yet neither was but Jacke.
     Decker’s but Tom; nor May, nor Middleton.
     And hee’s now but Jacke Foord that once were [was] John.”[41]

I may add, that in a work of later date, _Wit’s Recreations_, is the
following “epigram:”[42]

                       “TO MR. THOMAS MIDDLETON.

               Facetious Middleton, thy witty Muse
               Hath pleased all that books or men peruse.
               If any thee dispise, he doth but show
               Antipathy to wit in daring so:
               Thy fam’s above his malice, and ’twill be
               Dispraise enough for him to censure thee.”

Three of our author’s pieces are recorded to have been performed after
the Restoration, _A Trick to catch the Old One_, _The Widow_, and _The
Changeling_; but at the commencement of the eighteenth century his
writings may be considered as forgotten.

The publication of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_[43] in 1744 had some effect in
reviving the faded reputation of Middleton; and in 1778 his name was
made still more familiar to the literary world, when copies of _The
Witch_, printed from a MS. in the possession of Major Pearson,[44] were
circulated by Isaac Reed. Besides the less important discovery that
D’Avenant had availed himself of this drama in his alteration of
_Macbeth_,[45] it was evident that the resemblance between the scenes of
enchantment in _The Witch_, and those in Shakespeare’s tragedy as
originally written, must have been more than accidental. Steevens
maintained that Shakespeare was the imitator. Malone at first coincided
in that opinion; but receding from it at a later period of life, he
endeavoured to establish by a lengthy dissertation that the performance
of _Macbeth_ (which he fixes in 1606[46]), was anterior to that of _The
Witch_; and though his reasoning appears to me very far from convincing,
I am by no means disposed to assert that the conclusion at which he has
so laboriously arrived is not the right one.[47] Gifford, indeed, has
unhesitatingly pronounced that Shakespeare was the copyist;[48] but,
notwithstanding the respect which I entertain for that critic, his
incidental remarks on the present question have little weight with me:
he has assigned no grounds for his decision; he had not, I apprehend,
considered the subject with much attention; and on two occasions at
least, he appears to have alluded to it chiefly for the sake of giving
additional force to the blows which he happened to be aiming at the
luckless “commentators.” As Shakespeare undoubtedly possessed the
creative power in its utmost perfection, and as no satisfactory evidence
has been adduced to shew that _The Witch_ was acted at an earlier period
than _Macbeth_, he must not be hastily accused of imitation. Yet since
he is known to have frequently remodelled the works of other writers, it
may be urged, that when he had to introduce witches into his tragedy, he
would hardly scruple to borrow from our author’s play[49] as much as
suited his immediate purpose. But, after all, there is an essential
difference[50] between the hags of Shakespeare and of Middleton; and
whichever of the two may have been the copyist, he owes so little to his
brother-poet, that the debt will not materially affect his claim to
originality. Concerning the tragi-comedy _The Witch_, I have only to
add, that its merit consists entirely in the highly imaginative pictures
of the preternatural agents, in their incantations, and their moonlight
revelry: the rest of it rises little above mediocrity.

In the estimation of an anonymous critic, _Women beware Women_ is
“Middleton’s finest play,”[51] and perhaps he has judged rightly. It is
indeed remarkable for the masterly conception and delineation of the
chief characters, and for the life and reality infused into many of the
scenes; though the dramatis personæ are almost all repulsive from their
extreme depravity, and the catastrophe is rather forced and unnatural.
In this tragedy, says Hazlitt, there is “a rich marrowy vein of internal
sentiment, with fine occasional insight into human nature, and cool
cutting irony of expression.”[52] To his subsequent observation, that
“the interest decreases, instead of increasing, as we read on,” I by no
means assent.

_The Changeling_ affords another specimen of Middleton’s tragic powers.
If on the whole inferior to the piece last mentioned, it displays, I
think, in several places, a depth of passion unequalled throughout the
present volumes. According to the title-page, William Rowley, who was
frequently his literary associate, had a share in the composition; but I
feel convinced that the terribly impressive passages of this tragedy, as
well as those serious portions of _A Fair Quarrel_ which Lamb has
deservedly praised, and the pleasing characters of Clara and Constanza
in _The Spanish Gipsy_, are beyond the ability of Rowley.

Among our author’s works there are few more original and ingenious than
_A Game at Chess_. By touches of sweet fancy, by quaint humour, and by
poignant satire, he redeems the startling absurdities in which the plan
of the drama had necessarily involved him.

Middleton’s “principal efforts,” says an accomplished writer, “were in
comedy, where he deals profusely in grossness and buffoonery. The cheats
and debaucheries of the town are his favourite sources of comic
intrigue.”[53] _A Mad World, my Masters_, and _A Trick to catch the Old
One_, are the most perfect of the numerous comedies which Mr. Campbell
has dismissed with so slight and unfavourable a notice; and next to them
may be ranked _The Roaring Girl_,[54] _A Chaste Maid in Cheapside_,
_Michaelmas Term_, and _No Wit, no Help like a Woman’s_. The dialogue of
these pieces is generally spirited; the characters, though their
peculiarities may be sometimes exaggerated, are drawn with breadth and
discrimination; and the crowded incidents afford so much amusement, that
the reader is willing to overlook the occasional violation of
probability. As they faithfully reflect the manners and customs of the
age, even the worst of Middleton’s comedies[55] are not without their
value.

A critic, whom I have already quoted, after observing that “it is
difficult to assign Middleton any precise station among the remarkable
men who were his contemporaries,”[56] proceeds to compare him with
Webster and Ford, who were assuredly poets of a higher order. The
dramatists with whom, in my opinion, Middleton ought properly to be
classed—though superior to him in some respects and inferior in
others—are Dekker, Heywood, Marston, and Chapman: nor perhaps does
William Rowley fall so much below them that he should be excluded from
the list.




                        ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA.




                        ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA.


In the first volume, and in the greater part of the second volume, I
marked the deviations from the old editions with a minuteness which I
afterwards saw to be unnecessary; and throughout the remainder of the
work I accordingly abandoned that system of annotation.

                              THE OLD LAW.

                         Vol. i. p. 23, line 2.

                    “_Not_ fainting,”

Read

                    “_Nor_ fainting.”

                          Vol. i. p. 28, l. 4.

_pan’d hose_] Are, I believe, more correctly described by Gifford as
“breeches composed of small squares or pannels.” Note on Massinger’s
_Works_, vol. ii. p. 485, ed. 1813. “A kind of trunk breeches, formed of
stripes of various-coloured cloth, occasionally intermixed with slips of
silk or velvet, stitched together.” Introd. to Ford’s _Works_, p.
clxxvii.

                         Vol. i. p. 50, l. 11.

_Scirophorion_ ... _Hecatombaion_] When I reprinted Gifford’s note on
these words, which he calls “a miserable ostentation of Greek
literature,” I forgot to observe, that the “Grecian Moneths” were
formerly not unfamiliar to the vulgar; see, for instance, the last page
of Pond’s _Almanack_, 1610.

                             --------------

                        BLURT, MASTER-CONSTABLE.

                         Vol. i. p. 235, l. 18.

_kerry merry buff_] So Nash, “Yea, without _kerry merry buffe_ be it
spoken,” &c. _Haue with you to Saffron-walden_, 1596, sig. F 4; and
Kempe, “One hath written Kemps farewell to the tune of _Kery, mery,
Buffe_.” Dedication of the _Nine daies Wonder_, 1600.

                         Vol. i. p. 236, l. 12.

_Cornelius’ dry-fats_] Compare Taylor, the water-poet: “She [the bawd]
will harbour no ventred commodity in her warehouse, and if the Informer
or Constable doe light vpon one of her conceal’d _dryfats_, Punchions,
fardels,” &c. _A Bawd_, p. 103—_Workes_, 1630.

                         Vol. i. p. 242, l. 19.

                “_Enter_ Doyt and Dandyprat.”

Read

                “_Re-enter_ Doyt,” &c.

                   Vol. i. p. 282, last line but one.

            “_I’ll_ keep time just to a minute, I.”

Read, for the metre,

            “_I will_ keep,” &c.

                         Vol. i. p. 283, l. 16.

_lantern and candle-light_] “Was anciently accounted one of the cries of
London, being the usual words of the bellman:” see Nares’s _Gloss._ in
v.

                         Vol. i. p. 290, l. 23.

          “marry, Blurt master-constable.”

Read

          “marry, Blurt, master constable!”

a proverbial expression: see p. 225 of the same vol.

                         Vol. i. p. 292, l. 18.

            “_Enter_ Blurt and all his Watch.”

Read

            “_Re-enter_ Blurt,” &c.

                            Vol. i. p. 295.

               Dele the note “_sheaths_] Qy. ‘sheathed’?”

                            Vol. i. p. 298.

                Dele the note “_pickst_] Qy. ‘prickst’?”

                         Vol. i. p. 306, l. 19.

                              “at _his_ foot I’ll lie
                  That dares touch her.”

For “his” of old ed. the sense requires that we should read “this,”—an
alteration which I intended, but by some oversight neglected, to make in
the text. As to my note, “_lie_] i. e. lay—for the sake of the
rhyme”—the word, I believe, is rightly explained; but I find that
Brathwait has used “lies” for “lays,” even in the middle of a line:

          “The proudest Peeres he to subiection brings,
          And prostrate _lies_ the Diadems of Kings.”
              _Strappado for the Diuell_, 1615, p. 229 [213].

                             --------------

                             THE PHŒNIX.

                         Vol. i. p. 336, l. 28.

_steaks_] That this is the right reading, appears from a passage in
_Your Five Gallants_: see vol. ii. p. 287.

                         Vol. i. p. 351, l. 4.

_Without thee_] I was wrong in supposing that the earlier part of the
line had dropt out: see notes on imperfect couplets, vol. i. p. 424,
vol. ii. pp. 7, 307, &c.

                             --------------

                            MICHAELMAS TERM.

                         Vol. i. p. 428, l. 17.

_scurvy murrey kersey_] So in _The Two Merry Milke-Maids_, 1620;
“foolish, _scuruy_, _course-kersie_, durty-tayl’d, dangling dug-cow.”
Sig. C. 3.

                         Vol. i. p. 455, l. 20.

_i’ th’ wold of Kent_] I ought not to have altered “wild” into “wold:”
compare _The Marriage-Broaker by M. W._; “Ride to my Farm _i’ th’
wild_,” p. 27—_Gratiæ Theatrales_, 1662.

                         Vol. i. p. 473, l. 17.

_a warning-piece_] The text is quite right: so Dekker, “Ther’s _a
warning peece_. Away.” _Whore of Babylon_, 1607, sig. C. iv.; and S.
Rowley,

           “He makes his love to us _a warning-peece_
           To arme ourselves against we come to court.”
                     _Noble Spanish Souldier_, 1634, sig. H.

                         Vol. i. p. 475, l. 26.

_the row_] Perhaps I ought to have printed “row” with a capital
letter,—i. e. Goldsmiths’-Row in Cheapside: see Stow’s _Survey_, b. iii.
p. 198, ed. 1720; and Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. v. p.
93.

                             --------------

                     A TRICK TO CATCH THE OLD ONE.

                             Vol. ii. p. 3.

We learn from Downes’s _Roscius Anglicanus_ that this play was one of
the early dramas revived between 1662 and 1665, p. 36, ed. Waldron.

                         Vol. ii. p. 5, l. 10.

_Longacre_] The editor of 1816 is mistaken: this word was used for an
estate in general; compare _Lady Alimony_, 1659, “It will run like
Quicksilver over all their Husbands Demains: and in very short time make
a quick dispatch of all his _Long acre_.” Sig. B 3.

A passage of _Gammer Gurton’s Needle_, which stands thus in the various
editions of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_,

     “Tome Tannkard’s cow (be gog’s bones) she set me up her sail,
     And flynging about his _halse aker_, fysking with her taile,”
     &c.

has drawn forth the following extraordinary note from Steevens: “I
believe we should read _halse anchor_, or _anker_, as it was anciently
spelt; a naval phrase. The _halse_ or _halser_ was a particular kind of
cable,” &c., vol. ii. p. 11, last ed.—If Steevens, or the other editors,
had only taken the trouble to look at the 4to of 1575, they would have
found the true reading—“_halfe aker_,” i. e. small bit of ground.

                             --------------

                          THE FAMILY OF LOVE.

                        Vol. ii. p. 106, l. 32.

_Weber remarks_, &c.] The mistake of Weber may be traced to Langbaine,
who says, “This Play is mentioned by Sir Thomas Bornwel in _The Lady of
Pleasure_, Act 1. Sc. 1.” _Acc. of English Dram. Poets_, p. 372.

                         Vol. ii. p. 118, note.

                “a corruption of _will_.”

Read

                “a corruption of _wilt_.”

                         Vol. ii. p. 125, l. 1.

_We saw Samson bear the town-gates on his neck from the lower to the
upper stage, with that life and admirable accord, that it shall never be
equalled, unless the whole new livery of porters set [to] their
shoulders_] Middleton seems to have had in his recollection a passage of
Shakespeare’s _Love’s Labour’s Lost_: “Sampson, master: he was a man of
good carriage, great carriage; for he carried the town-gates on his
back, like a porter.” Act i. sc. 2.

                        Vol. ii. p. 148, l. 28.

                   _familiar_] i. e. attendant demon.

                        Vol. ii. p. 178, l. 21.

_Europa’s sea-form_] Probably “sea-form” is used in the sense of sea-
seat,—the bull on which she sat.

                         Vol. ii. p. 194, l. 8.

_play Ambidexter_] I was wrong, I believe, in saying that this
expression has an allusion to Preston’s _Cambises_: it is by no means
uncommon.

                             --------------

                          YOUR FIVE GALLANTS.

                        Vol. ii. p. 255, l. 16.

                “_Hist!_ a supply.”

Read, with old ed.,

                “_Pist!_ a supply.”

See notes, vol. ii. pp. 460, 468.

                        Vol. ii. p. 264, l. 20.

        _E’en where his fear lies most, there will I meet him._

After this line insert “_Exit_;” and in the note, for “and thrown a
scarf over his face (see what follows), the audience,” &c., read “and
having made his exit at one door, had re-entered at the other with a
scarf thrown over his face, the audience,” &c.

                        Vol. ii. p. 268, l. 27.

                “Master, _hist_, master!”

Read, with old ed.,

                “Master, _pist_, master!”

See notes, vol. ii. pp. 460, 468.

                         Vol. ii. p. 290, l. 7.

         PUR. _Thy father gave the ram’s head, boy?_
         BOY. _No, you’re deceived; my mother gave that, sir._

The boy means that she made his father a cuckold: compare Dekker’s
_Owles Almanacke_, 1618; “Men whose wiues haue light heeles, are called
_Ramme-headed Cuckolds_,” p. 10.

                             --------------

                        A MAD WORLD, MY MASTERS.

                        Vol. ii. p. 333, l. 25.

_the glory of his complement_] I doubt if Steevens’s explanation of this
passage be the right one, or if _complement_ mean here any thing more
than courtly address.

                       Vol. ii. p. 369, note 812.

Steevens’s remark, cited here by Reed, that a horse was sometimes
denominated a _footcloth_, is certainly wrong. “Sir Bounteous,” observes
Nares (_Gloss._ in v.), “is said to [be] alight[ed] from his
_footcloth_, as one might say, alighted from his saddle.”

                             --------------

                           THE ROARING GIRL.

                      Vol. ii. p. 466, last line.

_the high German’s size_] This person is probably alluded to in the
following passage of Dekker’s _Newes from Hell_, &c. 1606: “As for
Rapier and dagger, the Germane may be his journeyman.” Sig. B. See also
Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Knight of the Burning Pestle_—_Works_, vol. i.
p. 215, ed. Weber; and Shirley’s _Opportunity_—_Works_, vol. iii. p.
407, where Gifford observes, that “he seems to have been ‘a master of
fence,’ or common challenger.”

                        Vol. ii. p. 511, l. 27.

                     “’Twas like a _sigh_ of his.”

Since writing the note on this passage, I have met with the following
lines in _The Travailes of the Three English Brothers_, _&c._ (by Day,
W. Rowley, and Wilkins), 1607;

       “Pray Turke, let thy heart _sigth_ and thine eyes weepe.”
                                                       Sig. B 3.
       “To whose continuall kneelings, teares, and _sighthes_.”
                                                       Sig. B 4.

                      Vol. ii. p. 530, note 1134.

I am told that a gentleman in London possesses an edition of the _Life
of Long Meg of Westminster_, printed in 1582.

                         Vol. ii. p. 541, l. 1.

                   “Peck, pennam, _lay_, or popler.”

I ought to have substituted “lap” for “lay,” as Reed (see note)
suggests.

                             --------------

                           THE HONEST WHORE.

                         Vol. iii. p. 9, l. 16.

_Curs’d be that day for ever_, &c.] In a note on Shakespeare’s _King
John_, act iii. sc. 1, Henderson has pointed out the resemblance between
this speech of Hippolito and that of Constance which begins,

                “A wicked day, and not a holy day!” &c.

                        Vol. iii. p. 42, l. 20.

    “CAS. Please you be here, my lord?    [_Offers tobacco._”

This appears to have been the customary expression on such an occasion:
in _Wine, Beere, Ale, and Tobacco, Contending for Superiority, a
Dialogue_, we read,

                            “_Enter Tobaco._

_Tobaco._ Be your leaue gentlemen—wilt _please you be here_, sir?”

                                                 Sig. C 4. ed. 1630.

                      Vol. iii. p. 60, last line.

_ningle_] I have observed, in my note, that all the eds. except that of
1605 have “mingle.” Nares (who had not seen that rare edition), citing
this passage, gives _Mingle_ in his _Gloss._ as a legitimate word; but I
do not recollect to have met with such a form.

                        Vol. iii. p. 80, l. 26.

_turn Turk_] “Was,” says Gifford, “a figurative expression for a change
of condition, or opinion.” Note on Massinger’s _Works_, vol. ii. p. 222,
ed. 1813.

                         Vol. iii. p. 83, l. 9.

_orangado_] Should be “oringado” or “eringado:” _oringo_ was an old form
of _eringo_.

                         Vol. iii. p. 91, l. 7.

          “_A sister’s thread_, i’faith, had been enough.”

In Ford’s _Lady’s Trial_ is the same expression:

          “A flake, no bigger than _a sister’s thread_,”

which Gifford too hastily altered to “a _spider’s_ thread,” _Works_,
vol. ii. p. 306.—That “sister’s” is not a misprint, there can be no
doubt: it seems to be a form of _sewster’s_.

               “At euery twisted _thrid_ my rock let fly
               Unto the _sewster_.”

B. Jonson’s _Sad Shepherd_—_Works_, vol. vi. p. 282, ed. Giff.

                        Vol. iii. p. 108, l. 25.

_We see you, old man, for all you dance in a net_] An allusion to the
proverbial saying, “You dance in a net, and think nobody sees you.”
Ray’s _Proverbs_, p. 5, ed. 1768.

                        Vol. iii. p. 115, l. 21.

_Bow a little_] i. e. bend your hand a little: so in _The Spanish
Gipsy_, Alvarez, while telling the fortune of Louis, says to him, “Bend
your hand thus:” see vol. iv. p. 149.

                             --------------

                  THE SECOND PART OF THE HONEST WHORE.

                        Vol. iii. p. 152, l. 12.

_I’ll fly high, wench, hang toss!_] In this passage, says Gifford,
“_toss_ is used in a way that would induce one to think it meant low
play, or a hazard of petty sums.” Note on Massinger’s _Works_, vol. iii.
p. 160, ed. 1813.

                        Vol. iii. p. 197, l. 9.

_a cob_] “A [silver] _Cob_ of Ireland, or a Peece of Eight, is worth
four shilling eight pence. It is a Spanish Coin, not round but cornered,
or nuke shotten, and passith according to its weight for more or less.”
R. Holme’s _Ac. of Armory_, b. iii. c. ii. p. 30.

                        Vol. iii. p. 199, l. 3.

_Must I be fed with chippings? you’re best get a clapdish, and say
you’re proctor to some spittle-house_] “It was once,” says Gifford, “the
practice for beadles and other inferior parish officers, to go from door
to door with a clap-dish, soliciting charity for those unhappy
sufferers, who are now better relieved by voluntary subscriptions.” Note
on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. i. p. 44.

                        Vol. iii. p. 200, l. 3.

_old Cole_] Is the name of the sculler in the puppet-show of _Hero and
Leander_, introduced into B. Jonson’s _Bartholomew Fair_, act v. sc. 3:
see _Works_, vol. iv. p. 509 (note), and p. 520, ed. Gifford.

                             --------------

                               THE WIDOW.

                        Vol. iii. p. 354, l. 3.

_improv’d_] Is right; meaning, as it frequently does, proved.

                        Vol. iii. p. 373, l. 22.

_And they’re both well provided for, they’re i’ th’ hospital_]
“_Hospital_” ought to have been printed with a capital letter: for
though the scene of the play is laid in Italy, yet the allusion (as
Gifford observes, note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. i. p 41), is to
Christ’s Hospital, whither, when it was first established, the
foundlings taken up in the city were sent for maintenance and education.

                        Vol. iii. p. 383, l. 19.

_Come, my dainty doxies?_] I neglected to notice that this song is found
entire in our author’s _More Dissemblers besides Women_: see p. 606 of
the same volume.

                             --------------

                            A FAIR QUARREL.

                        Vol. iii. p. 510, l. 11.

_from the six windmills to Islington_] “The third great Field from
Moorgate, next to _the six Windmills_.” Stow’s _Survey_, b. iii. p. 70,
ed. 1720.

                        Vol. iii. p. 514, l. 17.

_a quadrangular plumation_] Compare Vigon’s _Workes of Chirurgerie_,
&c., 1571, where, treating of “tentes, lyntes, and bolsters” for wounds,
he tells us that “some [_bolsters_] _bene quadrate_;” and a little
after, “some moreouer vse _bolsters made of fethers_,” fol. cxiii.

                             --------------

                      A CHASTE MAID IN CHEAPSIDE.

                       Vol. iv. p. 5, last line.

_board_] The spelling of the old ed. is right—“_bord_,” i. e. size. So
in Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Knight of the Burning Pestle_;

                       “underneath his chin
         He plants a brazen piece of mighty _bord_.”
            Act iii. sc. 2—_Works_, vol. i. p. 214, ed. Weber.

where, says M. Mason, “_bord_ means rim or circumference.”

                         Vol. iv. p. 32, l. 4.

_corps_] So the word is used as a plural in _Epigrams and Satyres_, by
Richard Middleton, 1608;

                     “the Tyrants brazen bull
       Of Agrigentine, which being crammed full
       Of humane _corps_, did roare with such a maine,” &c.
                                                           p. 34.

                       Vol. iv. p. 66, note, read

“11 _Rider’s Dictionary_] _A Dict. Engl. and Lat. and Lat. and Engl._,
by John Rider, first printed at Oxford, 1589, was a work once in great
repute.”

                             --------------

                           THE SPANISH GIPSY.

                  Vol. iv. p. 145, last line but one.

                    “this she, trow;”

Read

                    “this she, trow?”

                             --------------

                            A GAME AT CHESS.

                         Vol. iv. p. 310, l. 1.

_Roch, Main, and Petronill, itch and ague curers_] Compare Taylor the
water-poet: “he must be content with his office, as ... Saint Roch with
scabbes and scurfes ... Saint Petronella the Ague or any Feuer.” _A
Bawd_, p. 93—_Workes_, 1630.

                         Vol. iv. p. 407, l. 6.

_Epistle to Nicholas the first_, &c.] Since writing the note on these
words, I have found in the Κειμηλια _Literaria_ of Colomesius what he
calls a confirmation of the absurd story of the six thousand infants’
heads. “Simile quid narratur a Joscelino, in Episcoporum Cantuariensium
Vitis, p. 210. editionis Hanovianæ. _Anno 1309_, inquit, _Radulphus
Bourn Augustinensis Ecclesiæ Abbas electus, cum ad Papam Avinioni
agentem confirmandus accessisset, reversus domum, testatur se vidisse in
itinere piscinam in quadam Monialium Abbatia, quæ_ PROVINES _dicebatur;
in qua, cum educta aqua luto purgaretur, multa parvulorum ossa, ipsaque
corpora adhuc integra reperiebantur. Unde ad criminalia judicia subeunda
viginti septem Moniales Parisios ductæ et carceribus mancipatæ fuerunt,
de quibus quid actum fuerit, nescivit_.” Col. _Opera_, p. 301, ed. Fabr.

                             --------------

                      ANY THING FOR A QUIET LIFE.

                        Vol. iv. p. 489, l. 25.

_the new prophet, the astrological tailor_] Perhaps Ball, who is thus
mentioned by Osborn: “And, if common Fame did not outstrip Truth, King
James was by Fear led into this extreme; finding his Son Henry not only
averse to any Popish Match, but saluted by the Puritans as one
prefigured in the Apocalyps for Rome’s destruction. And to parallel
this, one Ball, a Taylor, was inspired with a like Lunacy, tho’
something more chargeable; for not only he, but Ramsay his Majesty’s
Watch-maker, put out Money and Clocks, to be paid (but with small
Advantage, considering the Improbability) when King James should be
crowned in the Pope’s chair.” _Trad. Memor. on the Reign of K.
James_—_Works_, vol. ii. p. 153, ed. 1722; see also B. Jonson’s _Works_
by Gifford, vol. v. p. 242.

                             --------------

                          WOMEN BEWARE WOMEN.

                        Vol. iv. p. 520, l. 20.

_To take out_] i. e. to copy—a not uncommon expression in our old
writers.

                             --------------

                    NO WIT, NO HELP LIKE A WOMAN’S.

                         Vol. v. p. 23, l. 30.

_the widow’s notch shall lie open to you_] This passage is, I think,
explained by the following line in our author’s _Triumphs of Truth_;

      “The very _nooks_ where beldams hide their gold.”
                                          p. 229 of the same vol.

                       Vol. v. p. 77, last line.

               “To bid a _slander_ welcome than a truth.”

I did quite right in substituting “_slander_” for “slave.” These words
were frequently confounded by the old printers.

                               “Revenge and Death
     Like _slander_ [read _slaves_] attend the sword of Calymath.”
            _The Travailes of The Three English Brothers_ (by Day,
                    W. Rowley, and Wilkins), 1607, sig. C 4.

                         Vol. v. p. 131, l. 3.

_I from the baker’s ditch_] So in Brome’s _Sparagus Garden_, 1640,
“Sheart, Coulter, we be vallen into _the Bakers ditch_.” Sig. K 3. The
ancient way of punishing bakers, who did not give full weight, was by
the cucking-stool (see Grey’s note on _Hudibras_, P. iii. C. iii. v.
609); qy. is that punishment alluded to in the above passages?

                             --------------

                        THE INNER-TEMPLE MASQUE.

                         Vol. v. p. 148, l. 5.

_Ill May-Day_] i. e. Evil May-day—so called from the rising of the
London apprentices against the foreigners, on the first of May, 1517:
see _The Story of Ill May-Day, &c._, and the editor’s illustrations, in
Evans’s _Old Ballads_, vol. iii. p. 76, ed. 1810.

                         Vol. v. p. 148, l. 9.

_Midsummer-Eve, that watches warmest_] Perhaps this is an allusion to
the setting out of the Midsummer watch: see Herbert’s _Hist. of the
Twelve Great Livery Companies of London_, vol. i. p. 196, sqq.

                       Vol. v. p. 149, note 213.

                          “i. e. wife.”

Read

                          “i. e. city-wife.”

                             --------------

                       THE TRIUMPHS OF INTEGRITY.

                         Vol. v. p. 310, l. 1.

                          “pegmes.”

Read

                          “pegms.”

                             --------------

                            THE BLACK BOOK.

                         Vol. v. p. 543, l. 15.

_ketlers_] This word occurs in Kemp’s _Nine daies wonder_, 1600; “Those
that haue shewne themselues honest men, I wil set before them this
Caracter, H. for honesty; before the other Bench-whistlers shal stand K.
for _ketlers_ and keistrels, that wil driue a good companion without
need in them to contend for his owne.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE OLD LAW.




_The Excellent Comedy, called The Old Law, or A new way to please you._

                              { _Phil. Massinger._
                         _By_ { _Tho. Middleton._
                              { _William Rowley._

_Acted before the King and Queene at Salisbury House, and at severall other
places, with great Applause. Together with an exact and perfect Catalogue
of all the Playes, with the Authors Names, and what are Comedies,
Tragedies, Histories, Pastoralls, Masks, Interludes, more exactly Printed
then ever before. London, Printed for Edward Archer, at the signe of the
Adam and Eve, in Little Britaine._ 1656. 4to.

Steevens (Malone’s _Shakespeare_, by Boswell, ii. 425.) remarks, that this
drama was acted in 1599, founding the statement most probably on a passage
in Act iii. Sc. 1., where the Clerk having read from the church-book,
“_Agatha, the daughter of Pollux—born in an. 1540_,” adds, “and _now ’tis
99_.” From similar notices in several other old dramas, the periods at
which they were first produced have been clearly ascertained; and Gifford
(_Introd._ to Massinger, p. lv. 2d ed.) inclines to believe that _The Old
Law_ was really first acted in 1599, and that Massinger (who was then only
in the fifteenth year of his age) was employed, at a subsequent period, to
alter or to add a few scenes to the play. What portion of it was written by
Middleton cannot be determined.

The 4to. abounds in the grossest typographical errors. I have followed,
except in some trifling particulars, the text of Gifford, who published
_The Old Law_ in the ivth vol. of his Massinger.

“There is an exquisiteness of moral sensibility, making one to gush out
tears of delight, and a poetical strangeness in all the improbable
circumstances of this wild play, which are unlike any thing in the dramas
which Massinger wrote alone. The pathos is of a subtler edge. Middleton and
Rowley, who assisted in this play, had both of them finer geniuses than
their associate.”—LAMB, _Spec. of Engl. Dram. Poets_, p. 453.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

  EVANDER, _duke of Epire_.
  CRATILUS, _the executioner_.
  CREON, _father to_ SIMONIDES.
  SIMONIDES, } _young courtiers_.
  CLEANTHES, }
  LYSANDER, _husband to_ EUGENIA, _and uncle to_ CLEANTHES.
  LEONIDES, _father to_ CLEANTHES.
  GNOTHO, _the clown_.
  _Lawyers._
  _Courtiers._
  _Dancing-master._
  _Butler_,   }
  _Bailiff_,  }
  _Tailor_,   }
  _Coachman_, } _Servants to_ CREON.
  _Footman_,  }
  _Cook_,     }
  _Clerk._
  _Drawer._

  ANTIGONA, _wife to_ CREON.
  HIPPOLITA, _wife to_ CLEANTHES.
  EUGENIA, _wife to_ LYSANDER, _and mother to_ PARTHENIA.
  PARTHENIA.
  AGATHA, _wife to_ GNOTHO.
  _Old women_, _wives to_ CREON’S _servants_.
  _Courtezan._

                  _Fiddlers_, _Servants_, _Guard_, _&c._

                               SCENE, EPIRE.




                              THE OLD LAW.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                      _A Room in_ CREON’S _House_.

                  _Enter_ SIMONIDES _and two_ LAWYERS.

          SIM. Is the law firm, sir?
          FIRST LAW. The law! what more firm, sir,
        More powerful, forcible, or more permanent?
          SIM. By my troth, sir,
        I partly do believe it; conceive, sir,
        You have indirectly answered my question.
        I did not doubt the fundamental grounds
        Of law in general, for the most solid;
        But this particular law that me concerns,
        Now, at the present, if that be firm and strong,
        And powerful, and forcible, and permanent?
        I am a young man that has an old father.
          SECOND LAW. Nothing more strong, sir.
        It is—_Secundum statutum principis, confirmatum
        cum voce senatus_,[57] _et voce reipublicæ_; nay,
        _consummatum et exemplificatum_.
        Is it not in force,
        When divers have already tasted it,
        And paid their lives for penalty?
          SIM. ’Tis true.
        My father must be next; this day completes
        Full fourscore years upon him.
          SECOND LAW. He is[58] here, then,
        _Sub pœna statuti_: hence I can tell him,
        Truer than all the physicians in the world,
        He cannot live out to-morrow; this
        Is the most certain climacterical year—
        ’Tis past all danger, for there is[59] no ’scaping it.
        What age is your mother, sir?
          SIM. Faith, near her days too;
        Wants some two of threescore.[60]
          FIRST LAW. So! she’ll drop away
        One of these days too: here’s a good age now
        For those that have old parents and rich inheritance!
          SIM. And, sir, ’tis profitable for others too:
        Are there not fellows that lie bedrid in their offices,
        That younger men would walk lustily in?
        Churchmen, that even the second infancy
        Hath silenc’d, yet have[61] spun out their lives so
           long,
        That many pregnant and ingenious spirits
        Have languish’d in their hop’d reversions,
        And died upon the thought? and, by your leave, sir,
        Have you not places fill’d up in the law
        By some grave senators, that you imagine
        Have held them long enough, and such spirits as you,
        Were they remov’d, would leap into their dignities?
          FIRST LAW. _Die quibus in terris, et eris mihi magnus
             Apollo._[62]
          SIM. But tell me, faith, your fair opinion:
        Is’t not a sound and necessary law,
        This, by the duke enacted?
          FIRST LAW. Never did Greece,
        Our ancient seat of brave philosophers,
        ’Mongst all her _nomothetæ_[63] and lawgivers,
        Not when she flourish’d in her sevenfold sages,
        Whose living memory can never die,
        Produce a law more grave and necessary.
          SIM. I’m of that mind too.
          SECOND LAW. I will maintain, sir,
        Draco’s oligarchy, that the government
        Of community reduced into few,
        Fram’d a fair state; Solon’s _chreokopia_,[64]
        That cut off poor men’s debts to their rich creditors,
        Was good and charitable, but not full allow’d;[65]
        His _seisactheia_[66] did reform that error,
        His honourable senate of Areopagitæ.
        Lycurgus was more loose, and gave too free
        And licentious reins unto his discipline;
        As that a young woman, in her husband’s weakness,
        Might choose her able friend to propagate;
        That so the commonwealth might be supplied
        With hope of lusty spirits. Plato did err,
        And so did Aristotle, [in] allowing
        Lewd and luxurious limits to their laws:
        But now our Epire, our Epire’s Evander,
        Our noble and wise prince, has hit the law
        That all our predecessive students
        Have miss’d, unto their shame.

                           _Enter_ CLEANTHES.

          SIM. Forbear the praise, sir,
        ’Tis in itself most pleasing.—Cleanthes!
        O lad, here’s a spring for young plants to flourish!
        The old trees must down kept the sun from us;
        We shall rise now, boy.
          CLEAN. Whither, sir, I pray?
        To the bleak air of storms, among those trees
        Which we had shelter from?
          SIM. Yes, from our growth,
        Our sap and livelihood, and from our fruit.
        What! ’tis not jubilee with thee yet, I think,
        Thou look’st so sad on’t. How old is[67] thy father?
          CLEAN. Jubilee! no, indeed; ’tis a bad year with me.
          SIM. Prithee, how old’s thy father? then I can tell
             thee.
          CLEAN. I know not how to answer you, Simonides;
        He is[68] too old, being now exposed
        Unto the rigour of a cruel edict;
        And yet not old enough by many years,
        ’Cause I’d not see him go an hour before me.
          SIM. These very passions[69] I speak to my father.
        Come, come, here’s none but friends here, we may speak
        Our insides freely; these are lawyers, man,
        And shall be counsellors shortly.
          CLEAN. They shall be now, sir,
        And shall have large fees if they’ll undertake
        To help a good cause, for it wants assistance;
        Bad ones, I know, they can insist upon.
          FIRST LAW. O sir, we must undertake of both parts;
        But the good we have most good in.
          CLEAN. Pray you, say,
        How do you allow[70] of this strange edict?
          FIRST LAW. _Secundum justitiam_; by my faith, sir,
        The happiest edict that ever was in Epire.
          CLEAN. What, to kill innocents, sir? it cannot be,
        It is no rule in justice there to punish.
          FIRST LAW. O sir,
        You understand a conscience, but not law.
          CLEAN. Why, sir, is there so main a difference?
          FIRST LAW. You’ll never be good lawyer if you
             understand not that.
          CLEAN. I think, then, ’tis the best to be a bad one.
          FIRST LAW. Why, sir, the very letter and the sense
        both do[71] overthrow you in this statute, which[72]
        speaks, that every man living to fourscore years, and
        women to threescore, shall then be cut off, as fruitless
        to the republic, and law shall finish what nature
        linger’d at.
          CLEAN. And this suit shall soon be despatch’d in law?
          FIRST LAW. It is so plain it can have no demur;
        The church-book overthrows it.
          CLEAN. And so it does;[73]
        The church-book overthrows it, if you read it well.
          FIRST LAW. Still, you run from the law into error:
        You say it takes the lives of innocents;
        I say no, and so says common reason;
        What man lives to fourscore, and woman[74] to three,
        That can die innocent?
          CLEAN. A fine law[75] evasion!
        Good sir, rehearse the full statute to me.
          SIM. Fie! that’s too tedious; you have already
        The full sum in the brief relation.
          CLEAN. Sir,
        ’Mongst many words may be found contradictions;
        And these men dare sue and wrangle with a statute,
        If they can pick a quarrel with some error.
          SECOND LAW. Listen, sir, I’ll gather it as brief as I
             can for you:
         _Anno primo Evandri, Be it for the care and good of
        the commonwealth, (for divers necessary reasons that we
        shall urge,) thus peremptorily enacted_,—
          CLEAN. A fair pretence, if the reasons foul it not!
          SECOND LAW. _That all men living in our dominions
        of Epire, in their decayed nature, to the age of
        fourscore, or women to the age of threescore, shall on
        the same day be instantly put to death, by those means
        and instruments that a former proclamation, had to
        this purpose, through our said territories dispersed._
          CLEAN. There was no woman in this senate, certain.
          FIRST LAW. _That these men, being past their bearing
        arms to aid and defend their country; past their manhood
        and likelihood[76] to propagate any further issue to
        their posterity; and as well past their councils
        (whose[77] overgrown gravity is now run into dotage) to
        assist their country; to whom, in common reason, nothing
        should be so wearisome as their own lives, as they may
        be supposed tedious[78] to their successive heirs, whose
        times are spent in the good of their country, yet
        wanting the means to maintain it; and are like to grow
        old before their inheritance (born to them) come to
        their necessary use, [be condemned to die]: for the
        women,[79] for that they never were defence to their
        country; never by counsel admitted to the assist[ance]
        of [the] government of their country; only necessary to
        the propagation of posterity, and now, at the age of
        threescore, past[80] that good, and all their goodness:
        it is thought fit, then, (a quarter abated from the more
        worthy member) they[81] be put to death, as is before
        recited: provided that, for the just and impartial
        execution of this our statute, the example shall first
        begin in and about our court, which ourself will see
        carefully performed; and not, for a full month[82]
        following, extend any further into our dominions. Dated
        the sixth of the second month, at our Palace Royal in
        Epire._[83]
          CLEAN. A fine edict, and very fairly gilded!
        And is there no scruple in all these words
        To demur the law upon occasion?
          SIM. Pox! ’tis an unnecessary inquisition;
        Prithee, set him not about it.
          SECOND LAW. Troth, none, sir:
        It is so evident and plain a case,
        There is no succour for the defendant.
          CLEAN. Possible! can nothing help in a good case?
          FIRST LAW. Faith, sir, I do think there may be a hole,
        Which would protract—delay, if not remedy.
          CLEAN. Why, there’s some comfort in that: good sir,
             speak it.
          FIRST LAW. Nay, you must pardon me for that, sir.
          SIM. Prithee, do not;
        It may ope a wound to many sons and heirs,
        That may die after it.
          CLEAN. Come, sir, I know
        How to make you speak:—will this do it?[84]
                                         [_Gives him his purse._
          FIRST LAW. I will afford you my opinion, sir.
          CLEAN. Pray you, repeat the literal words expressly,
        The time of death.
          SIM. ’Tis an unnecessary question; prithee, let it
             alone.
          SECOND LAW. Hear his opinion; ’twill be fruitless,
             sir.
          _That man at the age of fourscore, and woman[85] at
        threescore, shall the same day be put to death._
          FIRST LAW. Thus I help the man to twenty-one years
             more.
          CLEAN. That were a fair addition.
          FIRST LAW. Mark it, sir; we say, man is not at age
        Till he be one-and-twenty; before, ’tis[86] infancy,
        And adolescency; now,[87] by that addition,
        Fourscore he cannot be till a hundred and one.
          SIM. O poor evasion!
        He’s fourscore years old, sir.
          FIRST LAW. That helps more, sir;
        He begins to be old at fifty, so, at fourscore
        He’s but thirty years old; so, believe it, sir,
        He may be twenty years in declination;
        And so long may a man linger and live by’t.
          SIM. The worst hope of safety that e’er I heard!
        Give him his fee again, ’tis not worth two deniers.
          FIRST LAW. There’s no law for restitution of fees,
             sir.
          CLEAN. No, no, sir; I meant it lost when ’twas given.

                     _Enter_ CREON _and_ ANTIGONA.

          SIM. No more, good sir!
        Here are ears unnecessary for your doctrine.
          FIRST LAW. I have spoke out my fee, and I have done,
             sir.
          SIM. O my dear father!
          CREON. Tush! meet me not in exclaims;
        I understand the worst, and hope no better.
        A fine law! if this hold, white heads will be cheap,
        And many watchmen’s places will be vacant;[88]
        Forty of ’em I know my seniors,
        That did due deeds of darkness too:—their country
        Has watch’d ’em a good turn for’t,
        And ta’en ’em napping now:
        The fewer hospitals will serve too, many
        May be us’d for stews and brothels; and those people
        Will never trouble ’em to fourscore.
          ANT. Can you play and sport with sorrow, sir?
          CREON. Sorrow! for what, Antigona? for my life?
        My sorrow[89] is I have kept it so long well,
        With bringing it up unto so ill an end:
        I might have gently lost it in my cradle,
        Before my nerves and ligaments grew strong,
        To bind it faster to me.
          SIM. For mine own sake,
        I should have been sorry for that.
          CREON. In my youth
        I was a soldier, no coward in my age;
        I never turn’d my back upon my foe;
        I have felt nature’s winters, sicknesses,
        Yet ever kept a lively sap in me
        To greet the cheerful spring of health again.
        Dangers on horse,[90] on foot, [by land,] by water,
        I have ’scap’d to this day; and yet this day,
        Without all help of casual accidents,
        Is only deadly to me, ’cause it numbers
        Fourscore years to me. Where is[91] the fault now?
        I cannot blame time, nature, nor my stars,
        Nor aught but tyranny. Even kings themselves
        Have sometimes tasted an even fate with me.
        He that has been a soldier all his days,
        And stood in personal opposition
        ’Gainst darts and arrows, the extremes of heat
        And pinching cold, has treacherously at home,
        In ’s secure quiet,[92] by a villain’s hand
        Been basely lost, in his stars’ ignorance:—
        And so must I die by a tyrant’s sword.
          FIRST LAW. O say not so, sir; it is by the law.
          CREON. And what’s that, sir, but the sword of tyranny,
        When it is brandish’d against innocent lives?
        I’m now upon my deathbed, sir; and ’tis fit
        I should unbosom my free conscience,
        And shew the faith I die in:—I do believe
        ’Tis tyranny that takes my life.
          SIM. Would it were gone,
        By one means or other! what a long day
        Will this be ere night!                       [_Aside._
          CREON. Simonides.
          SIM. Here, sir,[93]—weeping.[94]
          CREON. Wherefore dost thou weep?
          CLEAN. ’Cause you make no more haste to your end.
                                                       [_Aside._
          SIM. How can you question nature so unjustly?
        I had a grandfather, and then had not you
        True filial tears for him?
          CLEAN. Hypocrite!
        A disease of drought dry up all pity from him,
        That can dissemble pity with wet eyes!        [_Aside._
          CREON. Be good unto your mother, Simonides;
        She must be now your care.
          ANT. To what end, sir?
        The bell of this sharp edict tolls for me,
        As it rings out for you.—I’ll be as ready,
        With one hour’s stay, to go along with you.
          CREON. Thou must not, woman; there are years behind,
        Before thou canst set forward in this voyage;
        And nature, sure, will now be kind to all:
        She has a quarrel in’t, a cruel law
        Seeks to prevent[95] her, she will[96] therefore fight
           in’t,
        And draw out life even to her longest thread:
        Thou art scarce fifty-five.
          ANT. So many morrows!
        Those five remaining years I’ll turn to days,
        To hours, or minutes, for thy company.
        ’Tis fit that you and I, being man and wife,
        Should walk together arm in arm.
          SIM. I hope
        They’ll go together; I would they would, i’faith—
        Then would her thirds be sav’d too.—        [_Aside._
                              The day goes away, sir.
          CREON. Why, wouldst thou have me gone, Simonides?
          SIM. O my heart! Would you have me gone before you,
             sir,
        You give me such a deadly wound?
          CLEAN. Fine rascal!          [_Aside._
          SIM. Blemish my duty so with such a question?
        Sir, I would haste me to the duke for mercy:
        He that’s above the law may mitigate
        The rigour of the law. How a good meaning
        May be corrupted by [a] misconstruction!
          CREON. Thou corrupt’st mine; I did not think thou
             mean’st so.
          CLEAN. You were in the more error.          [_Aside._
          SIM. The words wounded me.
          CLEAN. ’Twas pity thou died’st not on’t.    [_Aside._
          SIM. I have been ransacking the helps of law,
        Conferring with these learned advocates:
        If any scruple, cause, or wrested sense
        Could have been found out to preserve your life,
        It had been bought, though with your full estate,
        Your life’s so precious to me;—but there’s[97] none.
          FIRST LAW. Sir, we have canvass’d her[98] from top to
             toe,
        Turn’d her[99] upside down, thrown[100] her on her side,
        Nay, open’d and dissected all her entrails,
        Yet can find none: there’s nothing to be hop’d,
        But the duke’s mercy.
          SIM. I know the hope of that;
        He did not make the law for that purpose.
          CREON. Then to his hopeless mercy last I go;
        I have so many precedents before me,
        I must call it hopeless: Antigona,
        See me deliver’d up unto my deathsman,
        And then we’ll part;—five years hence I’ll look for
           thee.
          SIM. I hope she will[101] not stay so long behind you.
                                                       [_Aside._
          CREON. Do not bate him an hour by grief and sorrow,
        Since there’s a day prefix’d, haste[n] it not.
        Suppose me sick, Antigona, dying now;
        Any disease thou wilt may be my end;
        Or when death’s slow to come, say tyrants send.
                                 [_Exeunt_ CREON _and_ ANTIGONA.
          SIM. Cleanthes, if you want money, to-morrow use me;
        I’ll trust you while[102] your father’s dead.
                                       [_Exit with the_ LAWYERS.
          CLEAN. Why, here’s a villain,
        Able to corrupt a thousand by example!
        Does the kind root bleed out his livelihood
        In parent distribution to his branches,
        Adorning them with all his glorious fruits,
        Proud that his pride is seen when he’s unseen;
        And must not gratitude descend again,
        To comfort his old limbs in fruitless winter?
        Improvident, [or] at least partial nature!
        (Weak woman in this kind), who, in thy last teeming,
        Forgetest still[103] the former, ever making
        The burthen of thy last throes the dearest darling!
        O yet in noble man reform [reform] it,
        And make us better than those vegetives
        Whose souls die with[104] ’em. Nature, as thou art old,
        If love and justice be not dead in thee,
        Make some the pattern of thy piety;
        Lest all do turn unnaturally against thee,
        And thou be blam’d for our oblivious

                   _Enter_ LEONIDES _and_ HIPPOLITA.

        And brutish reluctations! Ay, here’s the ground
        Whereon my filial faculties must build
        An edifice of honour, or of shame,
        To all mankind.
          HIP. You must avoid it, sir,
        If there be any love within yourself:
        This is far more than fate of a lost game,
        That another venture may restore again;
        It is your life, which you should not subject
        To any cruelty, if you can preserve it.
          CLEAN. O dearest woman, thou hast doubled now[105]
        A thousand times thy nuptial dowry to me!—
        Why, she whose love is but deriv’d from me,
        Is got before me in my debted duty.
          HIP. Are you thinking such a resolution, sir?
          CLEAN. Sweetest Hippolita, what love taught thee
        To be so forward in so good a cause?
          HIP. Mine own pity, sir, did first instruct me,
        And then your love and power did both command me.
          CLEAN. They were all blessed angels to direct thee;
        And take their counsel. How do you fare, sir?
          LEON. Cleanthes, never better:[106] I have conceiv’d
        Such a new joy within this old bosom,
        As I did never think would there have enter’d.
          CLEAN. Joy call you it? alas! ’tis sorrow, sir,
        The worst of sorrows, sorrow unto death.
          LEON. Death! what’s that, Cleanthes? I thought not
             on’t,
        I was in contemplation of this woman:
        ’Tis all thy comfort, son; thou hast in her
        A treasure unvaluable, keep her safe.
        When I die, sure ’twill be a gentle death,
        For I will die with wonder of her virtues;
        Nothing else shall dissolve me.
          CLEAN. ’Twere much better, sir,
        Could you prevent their malice.
          LEON. I’ll prevent ’em,
        And die the way I told thee, in the wonder
        Of this good woman. I tell thee there’s few men
        Have such a child: I must thank thee for her.
        That the strong[107] tie of wedlock should do more
        Than nature in her nearest ligaments
        Of blood and propagation! I should ne’er
        Have begot such a daughter of my own:
        A daughter-in-law! law were above nature,
        Were there more such children.
          CLEAN. This admiration
        Helps nothing to your safety: think of that, sir.
          LEON. Had you heard her, Cleanthes, but labour
        In the search of means to save my forfeit life,
        And knew the wise and [the] sound preservations
        That she found out, you would redouble all
        My wonder, in your love to her.
          CLEAN. The thought,
        The very thought, claims all that [love] from me,
        And she is now possest of’t:[108] but, good sir,
        If you have aught receiv’d from her advice,
        Let’s follow it; or else let’s better think,
        And take the surest course.
          LEON. I’ll tell thee one;
        She counsels me to fly my severe country;
        [To] turn all into treasure, and there build up
        My decaying fortunes in a safer soil,
        Where Epire’s law cannot claim me.
          CLEAN. And, sir,
        I apprehend it as a safest course,
        And may be easily accomplished;
        Let us be all most expeditious.
        Every country where we breathe will be our own,
        Or better soil; heaven is the roof of all;
        And now, as Epire’s situate by this law,
        There is ’twixt us and heaven a dark eclipse.
          HIP. O then avoid it, sir; these sad events
        Follow those black predictions.
          LEON. I prithee, peace;
        I do allow[109] thy love, Hippolita,
        But must not follow it as counsel, child;
        I must not shame my country for the law.
        This country here hath bred me, brought me up,
        And shall I now refuse a grave in her?
        I’m in my second infancy, and children
        Ne’er sleep so sweetly in their nurse’s cradle
        As in their natural mother’s.
          HIP. Ay, but, sir,
        She is unnatural; then the stepmother’s[110]
        To be preferr’d before her.
          LEON. Tush! she shall
        Allow it me despite of her entráils.
        Why, do you think how far from judgment ’tis,
        That I should travel forth to seek a grave
        That is already digg’d for me at home,
        Nay, perhaps find it in my way to seek it?—
        How have I then sought a repentant sorrow?
        For your dear loves, how have I banish’d you
        From your country ever? With my base attempt,
        How have I beggar’d you, in wasting that
        Which only for your sakes I bred together;
        Buried my name in Epire,[111] which I built
        Upon this frame, to live for ever in?
        What a base coward shall I be, to fly from
        That enemy which every minute meets me,
        And thousand odds he had not long vanquish’d me
        Before this hour of battle! Fly my death!
        I will not be so false unto your states,
        Not fainting to the man that’s yet in me:
        I’ll meet him bravely; I cannot (this knowing) fear
        That, when I am gone hence, I shall be there.
        Come, I have days of preparation left.
          CLEAN. Good sir, hear me:
        I have a genius that has prompted me,
        And I have almost form’d it into words—
        ’Tis done, pray you observe ’em; I can conceal you;
        And yet not leave your country.
          LEON. Tush! it cannot be,
        Without a certain peril on us[112] all.
          CLEAN. Danger must be hazarded, rather than accept
        A sure destruction. You have a lodge, sir,
        So far remote from way of passengers,
        That seldom any mortal eye does greet with’t;[113]
        And yet[114] so sweetly situate with thickets,
        Built with such cunning labyrinths within,
        As if the provident heavens, foreseeing cruelty,
        Had bid you frame it to this purpose only.
          LEON. Fie, fie! ’tis dangerous—and treason too,
        To abuse the law.
          HIP. ’Tis holy care, sir,
        Of your dear life, which is your own to keep,
        But not your own to lose, either in will
        Or negligence.
          CLEAN. Call you it treason, sir?
        I had been then a traitor unto you,
        Had I forgot this; beseech you, accept of it;
        It is secure, and a duty to yourself.
          LEON. What a coward will you make me!
          CLEAN. You mistake;
        ’Tis noble courage; now you fight with death,
        And yield not to him till you stoop under him.
          LEON. This must needs open to discovery,
        And then what torture follows!
          CLEAN. By what means, sir?
        Why, there is[115] but one body in all this counsel,
        Which cannot betray itself: we two are one,
        One soul, one body, one heart, that think one[116]
           thought;
        And yet we two are not completely one,
        But as [I] have deriv’d myself from you.—
        Who shall betray us where there is no second?
          HIP. You must not mistrust my faith, though my sex
             plead
        Weak[ness] and frailty for me.
          LEON. O I dare not!
        But where’s the means that must make answer for me?
        I cannot be lost without a full account,
        And what must pay that reckoning?
          CLEAN. O sir, we will
        Keep solemn obits for your funeral;
        We’ll seem to weep, and seem to joy withal,
        That death so gently has prevented you
        The law’s sharp rigour; and this no mortal ear shall
        Participate the knowledge of.
          LEON. Ha, ha, ha!
        This will be a sportive fine demur,
        If the error be not found.
          CLEAN. Pray doubt of none.
        Your company and best provision,
        Must be no further furnish’d than by us;
        And, in the interim, your solitude may
        Converse with heaven, and fairly prepare
        [For that] which was too violent and raging
        Thrown headlong on you.
          LEON. Still, there are some doubts
        Of the discovery; yet I do allow’t.
          HIP. Will you not mention now the cost and charge
        Which will be in your keeping!
          LEON. That will be somewhat,
        Which you might save too.
          CLEAN. With his will against him,
        What foe is more to man than man himself?
        Are you resolved, sir?
          LEON. I am, Cleanthes:
        If by this means I do get a reprieve,
        And cozen death awhile, when he shall come
        Armed in his own power to give the blow,
        I’ll smile upon him then, and laughing go.
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                          _Before the Palace._

          _Enter_ EVANDER, _three_ COURTIERS, _and_ CRATILUS.

        EVAN. Executioner!
        CRAT. My lord.
        EVAN. How did old Diocles take his death?
        CRAT. As weeping brides receive their joys at
        night;[117] With trembling, yet with patience.
        EVAN. Why, ’twas well.
          FIRST COURT. Nay, I knew my father would do well, my
           lord,
        Whene’er he came to die; I’d that opinion of him,
        Which made me the more willing to part from him;
        He was not fit to live i’ the world, indeed
        Any time these ten years, my lord,
        But I would not say so much.
          EVAN. No! you did not well in’t,
        For he that’s all spent is ripe for death at all hours,
        And does but trifle time out.
          FIRST COURT. Troth, my lord,
        I would I had known your mind nine years ago.
          EVAN. Our law is fourscore years, because we judge
        Dotage complete then, as unfruitfulness
        In women at threescore; marry, if the son
        Can, within compass, bring good solid proofs
        Of his own father’s weakness, and unfitness
        To live, or sway the living, though he want five
        Or ten years of his number, that’s not it;
        His defect makes him fourscore, and ’tis fit
        He dies when he deserves; for every act
        Is in effect then, when the cause is ripe.
          SECOND COURT. An admirable prince! how rarely he
             talks!
        O that we’d known this, lads! What a time did we endure
        In two-penny commons, and in boots twice vamp’d!
          FIRST COURT. Now we have two pair a week, and yet not
             thankful;
        ’Twill be a fine world for them, sirs, that come after
           us.
          SECOND COURT. Ay, and[118] they knew’t.
          FIRST[119] COURT. Peace, let them never know’t.
          THIRD COURT. A pox, there be young heirs will soon
             smell’t out.
          SECOND COURT. ’Twill come to ’em by instinct, man. May
             your grace
        Never be old, you stand so well for youth!
          EVAN. Why now, methinks, our court looks like a
             spring,
        Sweet, fresh, and fashionable, now the old weeds are
           gone.
          FIRST COURT. ’Tis as a court should be:
        Gloss and good clothes, my lord, no matter for merit;
        And herein your law proves a provident act,[120]
        When men pass not the palsy of their tongues,
        Nor colour in their cheeks.
          EVAN. But women,
        By that law, should live long, for they’re ne’er past
           it.
          FIRST COURT. It will have heats though, when they see
             the painting
        Go an inch deep i’the wrinkle, and take up
        A box more than their gossips: but for men, my lord,
        That should be the sole bravery of a palace,
        To walk with hollow eyes and long white beards,
        As if a prince dwelt in a land of goats;
        With clothes as if they sat on[121] their backs on
           purpose
        To arraign a fashion, and condemn’t to exile;
        Their pockets in their sleeves, as if they laid
        Their ear to avarice, and heard the devil whisper!
        Now ours lie downward, here, close to the flank;
        Right spending pockets, as a son’s should be
        That lives i’ the fashion: where[122] our diseas’d
           fathers,
        Wood[123] with the sciatica and aches,
        Brought up your pan’d hose[124] first, which ladies
           laugh’d at,
        Giving no reverence to the place lies ruined:
        They love a doublet that’s three hours a buttoning,
        And sits so close makes a man groan again,
        And his soul mutter half a day; yet these are those
        That carry sway and worth: prick’d up in clothes,
        Why should we fear our rising?
          EVAN. You but wrong
        Our kindness, and your own deserts, to doubt on’t.
        Has not our law made you rich before your time?
        Our countenance then can make you honourable.
          FIRST COURT. We’ll spare for no cost, sir, to appear
             worthy.
          EVAN. Why, you’re i’the noble way then, for the most
        Are but appearers; worth itself is lost,
        And bravery[125] stands for’t.

               _Enter_ CREON, ANTIGONA, _and_ SIMONIDES.

          FIRST COURT. Look, look, who comes here!
        I smell death, and another courtier,
        Simonides.
          SECOND COURT. Sim!
          SIM. Push![126] I’m not for you yet,
        Your company’s too costly; after the old man’s
        Despatch’d, I shall have time to talk with you;
        I shall come into the fashion, ye shall see too,
        After a day or two; in the mean time,
        I am not for your company.
          EVAN. Old Creon, you have been expected long;
        Sure you’re above fourscore.
          SIM. Upon my life,
        Not four-and-twenty hours, my lord; I search’d
        The church-book yesterday. Does your grace think
        I’d let my father wrong the law, my lord?
        ’Twere pity a’ my life then! no, your act
        Shall not receive a minute’s wrong by him,
        While I live, sir; and he’s so just himself too,
        I know he would no[t] offer’t:—here he stands.
          CREON. ’Tis just
        I die, indeed, my lord; for I confess
        I’m troublesome to life now, and the state
        Can hope for nothing worthy from me now,
        Either in force or counsel; I’ve a’ late
        Employ’d myself quite from the world, and he
        That once begins to serve his Maker faithfully
        Can never serve a worldly prince well after;
        ’Tis clean another way.
          ANT. O, give not confidence
        To all he speaks, my lord, in his own injury.
        His preparation only for the next world
        Makes him talk wildly, to his wrong, of this;
        He is not lost in judgment.
          SIM. She spoils all again.                  [_Aside._
          ANT. Deserving any way for state employment.
          SIM. Mother——
          ANT. His very household laws prescrib’d at home by him
        Are able to conform seven Christian kingdoms,
        They are so wise and virtuous.
          SIM. Mother, I say——
          ANT. I know your laws extend not to desert, sir,
        But to unnecessary years; and, my lord,
        His are not such; though they shew’ white, they’re
           worthy,
        Judicious, able, and religious.
          SIM. I’ll help you to a courtier of nineteen, mother.
          ANT. Away, unnatural!
          SIM. Then I am no fool, I’m sure,
        For to be natural at such a time
        Were a fool’s part indeed.
          ANT. Your grace’s pity, sir,
        And ’tis but fit and just.
          CREON. The law, my lord,
        And that’s the justest way.
          SIM. Well said, father, i’ faith!
        Thou wert ever juster than my mother still.
          EVAN. Come hither, sir.
          SIM. My lord.
          EVAN. What are those orders?
          ANT. Worth observation, sir,
        So please you hear them read.
          SIM. The woman speaks she knows not what, my lord.
        He make a law, poor man! he bought a table, indeed,
        Only to learn to die by’t, there’s the business, now;
        Wherein there are some precepts for a son too,
        How he should learn to live, but I ne’er look’d upon’t:
        For, when he’s dead, I shall live well enough,
        And keep a better table[127] than that, I trow.
          EVAN. And is that all, sir?
          SIM. All, I vow, my lord;
        Save a few running admonitions
        Upon cheese-trenchers,[128] as——

             _Take heed of whoring, shun it;
             ’Tis like a cheese too strong of the runnet._

        And such calves’ maws of wit and admonition,
        Good to catch mice with, but not sons and heirs;
        They’re not so easily caught.
          EVAN. Agent for death!
          CRAT. Your will, my lord?
          EVAN. Take hence that pile of years,
        Forfeit before[129] with unprofitable age,
        And, with the rest, from the high promontory,
        Cast him into the sea.
          CREON. ’Tis noble justice!
                                  [_Exit_ CRATILUS _with_ CREON.
          ANT. ’Tis cursed tyranny!
          SIM. Peace! take heed, mother;
        You’ve[130] but a short time to be cast down yourself;
        And let a young courtier do’t, and[131] you be wise,
        In the mean time.
          ANT. Hence, slave!
          SIM. Well, seven-and-fifty,[132]
        You’ve but three years to scold, then comes your
           payment.
                                               [_Exit_ ANTIGONA.
          FIRST COURT. Simonides.
          SIM. Push,[133] I’m[134] not brave enough to hold you
             talk yet;
        Give a man time; I have a suit a making.
          SECOND COURT. We love thy form first; brave clothes
             will come, man.
          SIM. I’ll make ’em come else, with a mischief to ’em,
        As other gallants do, that have less left ’em.
                                            [_Recorders within._
          EVAN. Hark! whence those sounds? what’s that?
          FIRST COURT. Some funeral,
        It seems, my lord; and young Cleanthes follows.

          _Enter a funeral procession; the hearse followed by_
            CLEANTHES _and_ HIPPOLITA _gaily dressed_.[135]

          EVAN. Cleanthes!
          SECOND COURT. ’Tis, my lord, and in the place
        Of a chief mourner too, but strangely habited.
          EVAN. Yet suitable to his behaviour; mark it;
        He comes all the way smiling, do you observ’t?
        I never saw a corse so joyfully follow’d:
        Light colours and light cheeks! who should this be?
        ’Tis a thing worth resolving.
          SIM. One, belike,
        That doth participate this[136] our present joy.
          EVAN. Cleanthes.
          CLEAN. O my lord!
          EVAN. He laugh’d outright now;
        Was ever such a contrariety seen
        In natural courses yet, nay, profess’d openly?
          FIRST COURT. I ha’ known a widow laugh closely, my
             lord,
        Under her handkercher, when t’other part
        Of her old face has wept like rain in sunshine;
        But all the face to laugh apparently,
        Was never seen yet.
          SIM. Yes, mine did once.
          CLEAN. ’Tis, of a heavy time, the joyfull’st day
        That ever son was born to.
          EVAN. How can that be?
          CLEAN. I joy to make it plain,—my father’s dead.
          EVAN. Dead!
          SECOND COURT. Old Leonides!
          CLEAN. In his last month dead:
        He beguil’d cruel law the sweetliest
        That ever age was blest to.——
        It grieves me that a tear should fall upon’t,
        Being a thing so joyful, but his memory
        Will work it out, I see: when his poor heart broke,
        I did not [do] so much: but leap’d for joy
        So mountingly, I touch’d the stars, methought;
        I would not hear of blacks, I was so light,
        But chose a colour orient like my mind;
        For blacks are often such dissembling mourners,
        There is no credit given to’t; it has lost
        All reputation by false sons and widows.
        Now I would have men know what I resemble,
        A truth, indeed; ’tis joy clad like a joy,
        Which is more honest than a cunning grief,
        That’s only fac’d with sables for a show,
        But gawdy-hearted. When I saw death come
        So ready to deceive you, sir,—forgive me,
        I could not choose but be entirely merry,
        And yet to see now!—of a sudden,
        Naming but death, I shew myself a mortal,
        That’s never constant to one passion long.
        I wonder whence that tear came, when I smil’d
        In the production on’t! sorrow’s a thief,
        That can, when joy looks on, steal forth a grief.
        But, gracious leave, my lord; when I’ve[137] perform’d
        My last poor duty to my father’s bones,
        I shall return your servant.
          EVAN. Well, perform it;
        The law is satisfied; they can but die:
        And by his death, Cleanthes, you gain well,
        A rich and fair revenue.
                    [_Flourish._ _Exeunt_ DUKE, COURTIERS, _&c._
          SIM. I would I had e’en
        Another father, condition[138] he did the like.
          CLEAN. I have past it bravely now; how blest was I
        To have the duke in sight![139] now ’tis confirm’d,
        Past fear or doubts confirm’d: on, on, I say,
        Him[140] that brought me to man, I bring to clay.

        [_Exit funeral procession, followed by_ CLEANTHES _and_
                               HIPPOLITA.

          SIM. I’m rapt now in a contemplation,
        Even at the very sight of yonder hearse;
        I do but think what a fine thing ’tis now
        To live, and follow some seven uncles thus,
        As many cousin-germans, and such people,
        That will leave legacies; a pox! I’d see ’em hang’d
           else,
        Ere I’d follow one of them, and[141] they could find the
           way.
        Now I’ve enough to begin to be horrible covetous.

         _Enter_ BUTLER, TAILOR, BAILIFF,[142] COOK, COACHMAN,
                             _and_ FOOTMAN.

          BUT. We come to know your worship’s pleasure, sir,
        Having long serv’d your father, how your good will
        Stands towards our entertainment.
          SIM. Not a jot, i’faith:
        My father wore cheap garments, he might do’t;
        I shall have all my clothes come home to-morrow;
        They will eat up all you, and[143] there were more of
           you, sirs.
        To keep you six at livery, and still munching!
          TAIL. Why, I’m a tailor; you’ve most need of me, sir.
          SIM. Thou mad’st my father’s clothes, that I confess;
        But what son and heir will have his father’s tailor,
        Unless he have a mind to be well laugh’d at?
        Thou’st been so used to wide long-side things, that when
        I come to truss, I shall have the waist of my doublet
        Lie upon my buttocks, a sweet sight!
          BUT. I a butler.
        SIM. There’s least need of thee, fellow; I shall ne’er
        drink at home, I shall be so drunk abroad.
        BUT. But a cup of small beer will do well next morning,
        sir.
        SIM. I grant you; but what need I keep so big a knave
        for a cup of small beer?
        COOK. Butler, you have your answer. Marry, sir, a cook
        I know your mastership cannot be without.
        SIM. The more ass art thou to think so; for what should
        I do with a mountebank, no drink in my house?—the
        banishing the butler might have been a warning for thee,
        unless thou meanest to choke me.
          COOK. I’ the mean time you have chok’d me, methinks.
          BAIL. These are superfluous vanities, indeed,
        And so accounted of in these days, sir;
        But then, your bailiff to receive your rents——
        SIM. I prithee, hold thy tongue, fellow; I shall take a
        course to spend ’em faster than thou canst reckon ’em;
        ’tis not the rents must serve my turn, unless I mean to
        be laughed at; if a man should be seen out of slash-me,
        let him ne’er look to be a right gallant. But, sirrah,
        with whom is your business?
        COACH. Your good mastership.
          SIM. You have stood, silent all this while, like men
        That know their strengths: i’these days, none of you
        Can want employment; you can win me wagers,
        Footman, in running races.
          FOOT. I dare boast it, sir.
          SIM. And when my bets are all come in, and store,
        Then, coachman, you can hurry me to my whore.
          COACH. I’ll firk ’em into foam else.
          SIM. Speaks brave matter:
        And I’ll firk some too, or’t shall cost hot water.
                 [_Exeunt_ SIMONIDES, COACHMAN, _and_ FOOTMAN.
          COOK. Why, here’s an age to make a cook a ruffian,
        And scald the devil indeed! do strange mad things,
        Make mutton-pasties of dog’s flesh,
        Bake snakes for lamprey-pies, and cats for conies.
        BUT. Come, will you be ruled by a butler’s advice once?
        for we must make up our fortunes somewhere now, as the
        case stands: let’s e’en, therefore, go seek out widows
        of nine and fifty, and[144] we can, that’s within a year
        of their deaths, and so we shall be sure to be quickly
        rid of ’em; for a year’s enough of conscience to be
        troubled with a wife, for any man living.
        COOK. Oracle butler! oracle butler! he puts down all
        the doctors a’ the name.[145]                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _A Room in_ CREON’S _House_.

                    _Enter_ EUGENIA _and_ PARTHENIA.

          EUG. Parthenia.
          PARTH. Mother.
          EUG. I shall be troubled
        This six months with an old clog; would the law
        Had been cut one year shorter!
          PARTH. Did you call, forsooth?
          EUG. Yes, you must make some spoonmeat for your
             father,
        And warm three nightcaps for him. [_Exit Parthenia._]
           Out upon’t!
        The mere conceit turns a young woman’s stomach.
        His slippers must be warm’d, in August too,
        And his gown girt to him in the very dog-days,
        When every mastiff lolls out’s tongue for heat.
        Would not this vex a beauty of nineteen now?
        Alas! I should[146] be tumbling in cold baths now,
        Under each armpit a fine bean-flower bag,
        To screw out whiteness when I list——
        And some seven of the properest men i’the dukedom
        Making a banquet ready i’the next room for me;
        Where he that gets the first kiss is enviéd,
        And stands upon his guard a fortnight after.
        This is a life for nineteen! ’tis but justice:
        For old men, whose great acts stand in their minds,
        And nothing in their bodies, do ne’er think
        A woman young enough for their desire;
        And we young wenches, that have mother-wits,
        And love to marry muck first, and man after,
        Do never think old men are old enough,
        That we may soon be rid on ’em; there’s our quittance.
        I’ve[147] waited for the happy hour this two year,
        And, if death be so unkind to let him live still,[148]
        All that time I have[149] lost.

                           _Enter_ COURTIERS.

          FIRST COURT. Young lady!
          SECOND COURT. O sweet precious bud of beauty!
        Troth, she smells over all the house, methinks.
          FIRST COURT. The sweetbriar’s but a counterfeit to
             her——
        It does exceed you only in the prickle,
        But that it shall not long, if you’ll be rul’d, lady.
          EUG. What means this sudden visitation, gentlemen?
        So passing well perfumed[150] too! who’s your milliner?
          FIRST COURT. Love, and thy beauty, widow.
          EUG. Widow, sir!
          FIRST COURT. ’Tis sure, and that’s as good: in troth,
             we’re suitors;
        We come a wooing, wench; plain dealing’s best.
          EUG. A wooing! what, before my husband’s dead?
          SECOND COURT. Let’s lose no time; six months will have
             an end, you know;
        I know’t by all the bonds that e’er I made yet.
          EUG. That’s a sure knowledge; but it holds not here,
             sir.
          FIRST COURT. Do not we know the craft of you
             young[151] tumblers?
        That [when] you wed an old man, you think upon
        Another husband as you are marrying of him;—
        We, knowing your thoughts, made bold to see you.

            _Enter_ SIMONIDES _richly drest, and_ COACHMAN.

          EUG. How wondrous right he speaks! ’twas my thought,
             indeed.
          SIM. By your leave, sweet widow, do you lack any
             gallants?
          EUG. Widow, again! ’tis a comfort to be call’d so.
          FIRST COURT. Who’s this? Simonides?
          SECOND COURT. Brave Sim, i’faith!
          SIM. Coachman!
          COACH. Sir.
          SIM. Have an especial care of my new mares.
        They say, sweet widow, he that loves a horse well,
        Must needs love a widow well.—When dies thy husband?
        Is’t not July next?
          EUG. O, you’re too hot, sir!
        Pray cool yourself, and take September with you.
          SIM. September! O, I was but two bows wide.
          FIRST COURT. Simonides.[152]
          SIM. I can entreat you, gallants, I’m in fashion too.

                           _Enter_ LYSANDER.

          LYS. Ha! whence this herd of folly? what are you?
          SIM. Well-willers to your wife: pray, ’tend your book,
             sir;
        We’ve[153] nothing to say to you, you may go die,
        For here be those in place that can supply.
          LYS. What’s thy wild business here?
          SIM. Old man, I’ll tell thee;
        I come to beg the reversion of thy wife:
        I think these gallants be of my mind too.—
         But thou art but a dead man, therefore what should a
        man do talking with thee? Come, widow, stand to your
        tackling.
          LYS. Impious blood-hounds!
          SIM. Let the ghost talk, ne’er mind him.
          LYS. Shames of nature!
          SIM. Alas, poor ghost! consider what the man is.
          LYS. Monsters unnatural! you that have been covetous
        Of your own fathers’ deaths, gape ye for mine now?
        Cannot a poor old man, that now can reckon
        E’en all the hours he has to live, live quiet,
        For such wild beasts as these, that neither hold
        A certainty of good within themselves,
        But scatter others’ comforts that are ripen’d
        For holy uses? is hot youth so hasty,
        It will not give an old man leave to die,
        And leave a widow first, but will make one,
        The husband looking on? May your destructions
        Come all in hasty figures to your souls!
        Your wealth depart in haste, to overtake
        Your honesties, that died when you were infants!
        May your male seed be hasty spendthrifts too,
        Your daughters hasty sinners, and diseas’d
        Ere they be thought at years to welcome misery!
        And may you never know what leisure is,
        But at repentance!—I am too uncharitable,
        Too foul; I must go cleanse myself with prayers.
        These are the plagues of fondness to old men,
        We’re punish’d home with what we dote upon.    [_Exit._
          SIM. So, so!
        The ghost is vanish’d: now, your answer, lady.
          EUG. Excuse me, gentlemen; ’twere as much impudence
        In me to give you a kind answer yet,
        As madness to produce a churlish one.
        I could say now, come a month hence, sweet gentlemen,
        Or two, or three, or when you will, indeed;
        But I say no such thing: I set no time,
        Nor is it mannerly to deny any.
        I’ll carry an even hand to all the world:
        Let other women make what haste they will,
        What’s that to me? but I profess unfeignedly,
        I’ll have my husband dead before I marry;
        Ne’er look for other answer at my hands, gentlemen.
          SIM. Would he were hanged, for my part, looks for
             other!
          EUG. I’m at a word.
          SIM. And I am[154] at a blow then;
        I’ll lay you o’ the lips, and leave you. [_Kisses
           her._
          FIRST COURT. Well struck, Sim.
          SIM. He that dares say he’ll mend it, I’ll strike him.
          FIRST COURT. He would betray himself to be a
             botcher,[155]
        That goes about to mend it.
          EUG. Gentlemen,
        You know my mind; I bar you not my house:
        But if you choose out hours more seasonably,
        You may have entertainment.

                         _Re-enter_ PARTHENIA.

          SIM. What will she do hereafter, when she’s a widow,
        Keeps open house already?
                           [_Exeunt_ SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS.'
          EUG. How now, girl!
          PARTH. Those feather’d fools that hither took their
             flight
        Have griev’d my father much.
          EUG. Speak well of youth, wench,
        While thou’st a day to live; ’tis youth must make thee,
        And when youth fails, wise women will make it;
        But always take age first, to make thee rich:
        That was my counsel ever, and then youth
        Will make thee sport enough all thy life after.
        ’Tis [the] time’s policy, wench; what is’t to bide
        A little hardness for a pair of years, or so?
        A man whose only strength lies in his breath,
        Weakness in all parts else, thy bedfellow,
        A cough o’ the lungs, or say a wheezing[156] matter;
        Then shake off chains, and dance all thy life after?
                  PARTH. Every one to their liking; but I say
        An honest man’s worth all, be he young or gray.
        Yonder’s my cousin.                            [_Exit._

                           _Enter_ HIPPOLITA.

          EUG. Art, I must use thee now;
        Dissembling is the best help for a virtue,
        That ever women had; it saves their credit oft.[157]
          HIP. How now, cousin!
        What, weeping?
          EUG. Can you blame me, when the time
        Of my dear love and husband now draws on?
        I study funeral tears against the day
        I must be a sad widow.
          HIP. In troth, Eugenia, I have cause to weep too;
        But, when I visit, I come comfortably,
        And look to be so quited:[158]—yet more sobbing?
          EUG. Oh!
        The greatest part of your affliction’s past,
        The worst of mine’s to come; I have one to die;
        Your husband’s father is dead, and fix’d in his
        Eternal peace, past the sharp tyrannous blow.
          HIP. You must use patience, coz.
          EUG. Tell me of patience!
          HIP. You have example for’t, in me and many.
          EUG. Yours was a father-in-law, but mine a husband:
        O, for a woman that could love, and live
        With an old man, mine is a jewel, cousin;
        So quietly he lies by one, so still!
          HIP. Alas! I have a secret lodg’d within me,
        Which now will out in pity:—I can’t hold.     [_Aside._
          EUG. One that will not disturb me in my sleep
        For[159] a whole month together, ’less it be
        With those diseases age is subject to,
        As aches,[160] coughs, and pains, and these, heaven
           knows,
        Against his will too:—he’s the quietest man,
        Especially in bed.
          HIP. Be comforted.
          EUG. How can I, lady?
        None know[161] the terror of an husband’s loss,
        But they that fear to lose him.
          HIP. Fain would I keep it in, but ’twill not be;
        She is my kinswoman, and I’m pitiful.
        I must impart a good, if I know’t once,
        To them that stand in need on’t; I’m like one
        Loves not to banquet with a joy alone,
        My friends must partake too. [_Aside._]—Prithee, cease,
           cousin;
        If your love be so boundless, which is rare,
        In a young woman, in these days, I tell you,
        To one so much past service as your husband,
        There is a way to beguile law, and help you;
        My husband found it out first.
          EUG. O sweet cousin!
          HIP. You may conceal him, and give out hisdeath
        Within the time; order his funeral too;
        We had it so for ours, I praise heaven for’t,
        And he’s alive and safe.
          EUG. O blessed coz,
        How thou revivest me!
          HIP. We daily see
        The good old man, and feed him twice a day.
        Methinks, it is the sweetest joy to cherish him,
        That ever life yet shew’d me.
          EUG. So should I think,
        A dainty thing to nurse an old man well!
          HIP. And then we have his prayers and daily blessing;
        And we two live so lovingly upon’t,
        His son and I, and so contentedly,
        You cannot think unless you tasted on’t.
          EUG. No, I warrant you. O loving cousin,
        What a great sorrow hast thou eas’d me of!
        A thousand thanks go with thee!
          HIP. I have a suit to you,
        I must not have you weep when I am gone.       [_Exit._
          EUG. No, if I do, ne’er trust me. Easy fool,
        Thou hast put thyself into my power for ever;
        Take heed of angering of me. I conceal!
        I feign a funeral! I keep my husband!
        ’Las! I’ve[162] been thinking any time these two years,
        I have kept him too long already.—
        I’ll go count o’er my suitors, that’s my business,
        And prick the man down; I ha’ six months to do’t,
        But could despatch’t[163] in one, were I put to’t.
                                                        [_Exit._


                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                          _Before the Church._

                      _Enter_ GNOTHO _and_ CLERK.

          GNOTH. You have searched o’er the parish-chronicle,
        sir?
          CLERK. Yes, sir; I have found out the true age and date
        of the party you wot on.
          GNOTH. Pray you, be covered, sir.
          CLERK. When you have shewed me the way, sir.
          GNOTH. O sir, remember yourself, you are a clerk.
          CLERK. A small clerk, sir.
          GNOTH. Likely to be the wiser man, sir; for your
        greatest clerks are not always so, as ’tis reported.
          CLERK. You are a great man in the parish, sir.
          GNOTH. I understand myself so much the better, sir; for
        all the best in the parish pay duties to the clerk, and
        I would owe you none, sir.
          CLERK. Since you’ll have it so, I’ll be the first to
        hide my head.
          GNOTH. Mine is a capcase: now to our business in[164]
        hand. Good luck, I hope; I long to be resolved.
          CLERK. Look you, sir, this is that cannot deceive you:
        This is the dial that goes ever true;
        You may say _ipse dixit_ upon this witness,
        And it is[165] good in law too.
          GNOTH. Pray you, let’s hear what it speaks.
          CLERK. Mark, sir.—_Agatha, the daughter of Pollux_,
        (this is your wife’s name, and the name of her father,)
        _born_——
          GNOTH. Whose daughter, say you?
          CLERK. The daughter of Pollux.
          GNOTH. I take it his name was Bollux.
          CLERK. Pollux the orthography I assure you, sir; the
        word is corrupted else.
          GNOTH. Well, on, sir,—of Pollux; now come on, Castor.
          CLERK. _Born in an._ 1540, and now ’tis 99. By this
        infallible record, sir, (let me see,) she is now just
        fifty-nine, and wants but one.
          GNOTH. I am sorry she wants so much.
          CLERK. Why, sir? alas, ’tis nothing; ’tis but so many
        months, so many weeks, so many——
          GNOTH. Do not deduct it to days,[166] ’twill be the
        more tedious; and to measure it by hourglasses were
        intolerable.
          CLERK. Do not think on it, sir; half the time goes away
        in sleep, ’tis half the year in nights.
          GNOTH. O, you mistake me, neighbour, I am loath to leave
        the good old woman; if she were gone now it would not
        grieve me; for what is a year, alas, but a lingering
        torment? and were it not better she were out of her
        pain? ’T must needs be a grief to us both.
          CLERK. I would I knew how to ease you, neighbour!
          GNOTH. You speak kindly, truly, and if you say but Amen
        to it, (which is a word that I know you are perfect in,)
        it might be done. Clerks are the most indifferent honest
        men,—for to the marriage of your enemy, or the burial of
        your friend, the curses or the blessings to you are all
        one; you say Amen to all.
          CLERK. With a better will to the one than the other,
        neighbour: but I shall be glad to say Amen to any thing
        might do you a pleasure.
          GNOTH. There is, first, something above your duty:
        [_Gives him money_] now I would have you set forward the
        clock a little, to help the old woman out of her pain.
          CLERK. I will speak to the sexton;[167] but the day will
        go ne’er the faster for that.
          GNOTH. O, neighbour, you do not conceit me; not the jack
        of the clock-house; the hand of the dial, I mean.—Come,
        I know you, being a great clerk, cannot choose but have
        the art to cast a figure.
          CLERK. Never, indeed, neighbour; I never had the
        judgment to cast a figure.
          GNOTH. I’ll shew you on the back side of your book, look
        you,—what figure’s this?
          CLERK. Four with a cipher, that’s forty.
          GNOTH. So! forty; what’s this now?
          CLERK. The cipher is turned into 9 by adding the tail,
        which makes forty-nine.
          GNOTH. Very well understood; what is’t now?
          CLERK. The 4 is turned into 3; ’tis now thirty-nine.
          GNOTH. Very well understood; and can you do this again?
          CLERK. O, easily, sir.
          GNOTH. A wager of that! let me see the place of my
        wife’s age again.
          CLERK. Look you, sir, ’tis here, 1540.
          GNOTH. Forty drachmas, you do not turn that forty into
        thirty-nine.
          CLERK. A match with you.
          GNOTH. Done! and you shall keep stakes yourself: there
        they are.
          CLERK. A firm match—but stay, sir, now I consider
        it, I shall add a year to your wife’s age; let me
        see—_Scirophorion_ the 17,—and now ’tis _Hecatombaion_
        the 11.[168] If I alter this, your wife will have but a
        month to live by the law.
          GNOTH. That’s all one, sir; either do it, or pay me my
        wager.
          CLERK. Will you lose your wife before you lose your
        wager?
          GNOTH. A man may get two wives before half so much money
        by ’em; will you do’t?
          CLERK. I hope you will conceal me, for ’tis flat
        corruption.
          GNOTH. Nay, sir, I would have you keep counsel; for I
        lose my money by’t, and should be laughed at for my
        labour, if it should be known.
          CLERK. Well, sir, there!—’tis done; as perfect [a] 39 as
        can be found in black and white: but mum, sir,—there’s
        danger in this figure-casting.
          GNOTH. Ay, sir, I know that: better men than you have
        been thrown over the bar for as little; the best is, you
        can be but thrown out of the belfry.

            _Enter the_ COOK, TAILOR, BAILIFF, _and_ BUTLER.

          CLERK. Lock close, here comes company; asses have ears
        as well as pitchers.
          COOK. O Gnotho,[169] how is’t? here’s a trick[170] of
        discarded cards of us! we were ranked with coats, as
        long as our old master lived.
          GNOTH. And is this then the end of serving-men?
          COOK. Yes, ’faith, this is the end of serving-men: a
        wise man were better serve one God than all the men in
        the world.
          GNOTH. ’Twas well spoke[171] of a cook. And are all
        fallen into fasting-days and Ember-weeks, that cooks are
        out of use?
          TAIL. And all tailors will be cut into lists and shreds;
        if this world hold, we shall grow both out of request.
          BUT. And why not butlers as well as tailors? if they can
        go naked, let ’em neither eat nor drink.
          CLERK. That’s strange, methinks, a lord should turn away
        his tailor, of all men:—and how dost thou, tailor?
          TAIL. I do so, so; but, indeed, all our wants are long
        of this publican, my lord’s bailiff; for had he been
        rent-gatherer still, our places had held together still,
        that are now seam-rent, nay cracked in the whole piece.
          BAIL. Sir, if my lord had not sold his lands that claim
        his rents, I should still have been the rent-gatherer.
          COOK. The truth is, except the coachman and the footman,
        all serving-men are out of request.
          GNOTH. Nay, say not so, for you were never in more
        request than now, for requesting is but a kind of a
        begging; for when you say, I beseech your worship’s
        charity, ’tis all one [as] if you say, I request it; and
        in that kind of requesting, I am sure serving-men were
        never in more request.
          COOK. Troth, he says true: well, let that pass, we are
        upon a better adventure. I see, Gnotho,[172] you have
        been before us; we came to deal with this merchant for
        some commodities.
          CLERK. With me, sir? any thing that I can.
          BUT. Nay, we have looked out our wives already: marry,
        to you we come to know the prices, that is, to know
        their ages; for so much reverence we bear to age, that
        the more aged, they shall be the more dear to us.
          TAIL. The truth is, every man has laid by his widow; so
        they be lame enough, blind enough, and old [enough],
        ’tis good enough.
          CLERK. I keep the town-stock; if you can but name ’em, I
        can tell their ages to [a] day.
          ALL. We can tell their fortunes to an hour, then.
          CLERK. Only you must pay for turning of the leaves.
          COOK. O, bountifully.—Come, mine first.
          BUT. The butler before the cook, while you live; there’s
        few that eat before they drink in a morning.
          TAIL. Nay, then the tailor puts in his needle of
        priority, for men do clothe themselves before they
        either drink or eat.
          BAIL. I will strive for no place; the longer ere I marry
        my wife, the older she will be, and nearer her end and
        my ends.
          CLERK. I will serve you all, gentlemen, if you will have
        patience.
          GNOTH. I commend your modesty, sir; you are a bailiff,
        whose place is to come behind other men, as it were in
        the bum of all the rest.
          BAIL. So, sir! and you were about this business too,
        seeking out for a widow?
          GNOTH. Alack! no, sir; I am a married man, and have
        those cares upon me that you would fain run into.
          BAIL. What, an old rich wife! any man in this age
        desires such a care.
          GNOTH. ’Troth, sir, I’ll put a venture with you, if you
        will; I have a lusty old quean to my wife, sound of wind
        and limb, yet I’ll give out to take three for one at the
        marriage of my second wife.
          BAIL. Ay, sir, but how near is she to the law?
          GNOTH. Take that at hazard, sir; there must be time, you
        know, to get a new. Unsight, unseen, I take three to
        one.
          BAIL. Two to one I’ll give, if she have but two teeth in
        her head.
          GNOTH. A match; there’s five drachmas for ten at my next
        wife.
          BAIL. A match.
          COOK. I shall be fitted bravely; fifty-eight, and
        upwards; ’tis but a year and a half, and I may chance
        make friends, and beg a year of the duke.
          BUT. Hey, boys! I am made sir butler; my wife that shall
        be wants but two months of her time; it shall be one ere
        I marry her, and then the next will be a honeymoon.
          TAIL. I outstrip you all; I shall have but six weeks of
        Lent, if I get my widow, and then comes eating-tide,
        plump and gorgeous.
          GNOTH. This tailor will be a man, if ever there were
        any.
          BAIL. Now comes my turn, I hope, goodman Finis, you that
        are still at the end of all, with a _so be it_. Well
        now, sirs? do you venture there as I have done; and I’ll
        venture here after you. Good luck, I beseech thee!
          CLERK. Amen, sir.
          BAIL. That deserves a fee already—there ’tis; please me,
        and have a better.
          CLERK. Amen, sir.
          COOK. How, two for one at your next wife! is the old one
        living?
          GNOTH. You have a fair match, I offer you no foul one;
        if death make not haste to call her, she’ll make none to
        go to him.
          BUT. I know her, she’s a lusty woman; I’ll take the
        venture.
          GNOTH. There’s five drachmas for ten at my next wife.
          BUT. A bargain.
          COOK. Nay, then we’ll be all merchants: give me.
          TAIL. And me.
          BUT. What has the bailiff sped?
          BAIL. I am content; but none of you shall know my
        happiness.
          CLERK. As well as any of you all, believe it, sir.
          BAIL. O, clerk, you are to speak last always.
          CLERK. I’ll remember’t hereafter, sir. You have done
        with me, gentlemen?

                            _Enter_ AGATHA.

          ALL. For this time, honest register.
          CLERK. Fare you well then; if you do,[173] I’ll cry Amen
        to’t. [_Exit._
          COOK. Look you, sir, is not this your wife?
          GNOTH. My first wife, sir.
          BUT. Nay, then we have made a good match on’t; if she
        have no froward disease, the woman may live this dozen
        years by her age.
          TAIL. I’m afraid she’s broken-winded, she holds silence
        so long.
          COOK. We’ll now leave our venture to the event; I must a
        wooing.
          BUT. I’ll but buy me a new dagger, and overtake you.
          BAIL. So we must all; for he that goes a wooing to a
        widow without a weapon, will never get her.
                          [_Exeunt all but_ GNOTHO _and_ AGATHA.
          GNOTH. O wife, wife!
          AGA. What ail you, man, you speak so passionately?[174]
          GNOTH. ’Tis for thy sake, sweet wife: who would think so
        lusty an old woman, with reasonable good teeth, and her
        tongue in as perfect use as ever it was, should be so
        near her time?—but the Fates will have it so.
          AGA. What’s the matter, man? you do amaze me.
          GNOTH. Thou art not sick neither, I warrant thee.
          AGA. Not that I know of, sure.
          GNOTH. What pity ’tis a woman should be so near her end,
        and yet not sick!
          AGA. Near her end, man! tush, I can guess at that;
        I have years good yet of life in the remainder:
        I want two yet at least of the full number;
        Then the law, I know, craves impotent and useless,
        And not the able women.
          GNOTH. Ay, alas! I see thou hast been repairing time as
        well as thou couldst; the old wrinkles are well filled
        up, but the vermilion is seen too thick, too thick—and I
        read what’s written in thy forehead; it agrees with the
        church-book.
          AGA. Have you sought my age, man? and, I prithee, how is
        it?
          GNOTH. I shall but discomfort thee.
          AGA. Not at all, man; when there’s no remedy, I will go,
        though unwillingly.
          GNOTH. 1539. Just; it agrees with the book: you have
        about a year to prepare yourself.
          AGA. Out, alas! I hope there’s more than so. But do you
        not think a reprieve might be gotten for half a
        score—and[175] ’twere but five year[s], I would not
        care? an able woman, methinks, were to be pitied.
          GNOTH. Ay, to be pitied, but not helped; no hope of
        that: for, indeed, women have so blemished their own
        reputations now-a-days, that it is thought the law will
        meet them at fifty very shortly.
          AGA. Marry, the heavens forbid!
          GNOTH. There’s so many of you, that, when you are old,
        become witches; some profess physic, and kill good
        subjects faster than a burning fever; and then school-
        mistresses of the sweet sin, which commonly we call
        bawds, innumerable of that sort: for these and such
        causes ’tis thought they shall not live above fifty.
          AGA. Ay, man, but this hurts not the good old women.
          GNOTH. I’faith, you are so like one another, that a man
        cannot distinguish ’em: now, were I an old woman, I
        would desire to go before my time, and offer myself
        willingly, two or three years before. O, those are brave
        women, and worthy to be commended of all men in the
        world, that, when their husbands die, they run to be
        burnt to death with ’em: there’s honour and credit! give
        me half a dozen such wives.
          AGA. Ay, if her husband were dead before, ’twere a
        reasonable request; if you were dead, I could be content
        to be so.
          GNOTH. Fie! that’s not likely, for thou hadst two
        husbands before me.
          AGA. Thou wouldst not have me die, wouldst thou,
        husband?
          GNOTH. No, I do not speak to that purpose; but I say
        what credit it were for me and thee, if thou wouldst;
        then thou shouldst never be suspected for a witch, a
        physician, a bawd, or any of those things: and then how
        daintily should I mourn for thee, how bravely should I
        see thee buried! when, alas, if he goes before, it
        cannot choose but be a great grief to him to think he
        has not seen his wife well buried. There be such
        virtuous women in the world, but too few, too few, who
        desire to die seven years before their time, with all
        their hearts.
          AGA. I have not the heart to be of that mind; but,
        indeed, husband, I think you would have me gone.
          GNOTH. No, alas! I speak but for your good and your
        credit; for when a woman may die quickly, why should she
        go to law for her death? Alack, I need not wish thee
        gone, for thou hast but a short time to stay with me:
        you do not know how near ’tis,—it must out; you have but
        a month to live by the law.
          AGA. Out, alas!
          GNOTH. Nay, scarce so much.
          AGA. O, O, O, my heart!                    [_Swoons._
          GNOTH. Ay, so! if thou wouldst go away quietly, ’twere
        sweetly done, and like a kind wife; lie but a little
        longer, and the bell shall toll for thee.
          AGA. O my heart, but a month to live!
          GNOTH. Alas, why wouldst thou come back again for a
        month?—I’ll throw her down again—O, woman, ’tis not
        three weeks; I think a fortnight is the most.
          AGA. Nay, then I am gone already.          [_Swoons._
          GNOTH. I would make haste to the sexton now, but I’m
        afraid the tolling of the bell will wake her again. If
        she be so wise as to go now—she stirs again; there’s two
        lives of the nine gone.
          AGA. O, wouldst thou not help to recover me, husband?
          GNOTH. Alas, I could not find in my heart to hold thee
        by thy nose, or box thy cheeks; it goes against my
        conscience.
          AGA. I will not be thus frighted to my death;
        I’ll search the church-record[s]: a fortnight! ’tis
        Too little of conscience, I cannot be so near;
        O time, if thou be’st kind, lend me but a year!
                                                        [_Exit._
          GNOTH. What a spite’s this, that a man cannot persuade
        his wife to die in any time with her good will! I have
        another bespoke already; though a piece of old beef will
        serve to breakfast, yet a man would be glad of a chicken
        to supper. The clerk, I hope, understands no Hebrew, and
        cannot write backward what he hath writ forward already,
        and then I am well enough.
        ’Tis but a month at most; if that were gone,
        My venture comes in with her two for one:
        ’Tis use enough a’ conscience for a broker[176]—if he
        had a conscience.                               [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                      _A Room in_ CREON’s _House_.

        _Enter_ EUGENIA _at one door_, SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS
                            _at the other_.

          EUG. Gentlemen courtiers.
          FIRST COURT. All your vow’d servants,[177] lady.
          EUG. O, I shall kill myself with infinite laughter!
        Will nobody take my part?
          SIM. An’t be a laughing business,
        Put it to me, I’m one of the best in Europe;
        My father died last too, I have the most cause.
          EUG. You ha’ pick’d out such a time, sweet gentlemen,
        To make your spleen a banquet.
          SIM. O the jest!
        Lady, I have a jaw stands ready for’t,
        I’ll gape half way, and meet it.
          EUG. My old husband,
        That cannot say his prayers out for jealousy,
        And madness at your coming first to woo me——
          SIM. Well said.
          FIRST COURT. Go on.
          SECOND COURT. On, on.
          EUG. Takes counsel with
        The secrets of all art, to make himself
        Youthful again.
          SIM. How? youthful! ha, ha, ha!
          EUG. A man of forty-five he would fain seem to be,
        Or scarce so much, if he might have his will, indeed.
          SIM. Ay, but his white hairs, they’ll betray his
             hoariness.
          EUG. Why, there you are wide: he’s not the man you
             take him for,
        Nor[178] will you know him when you see him again;
        There will be five to one laid upon that.
          FIRST COURT. How!
          EUG. Nay, you did well to laugh faintly there;
        I promise you, I think he’ll outlive me now,
        And deceive law and all.
          SIM. Marry, gout forbid!
          EUG. You little think he was at fencing-school
        At four a’clock this morning.
          SIM. How, at fencing-school!
          EUG. Else give no trust to woman.
          SIM. By this light,
        I do not like him, then; he’s like to live
        Longer than I, for he may kill me first, now.
          EUG. His dancer now came in as I met you.
          FIRST COURT. His dancer, too!
          EUG. They observe turns and hours with him;
        The great French rider will be here at ten,
        With his curvetting horse.
          SECOND COURT. These notwithstanding,
        His hair and wrinkles will betray his age.
          EUG. I’m sure his head and beard, as he has order’d
             it,
        Look not past fifty now: he’ll bring’t to forty
        Within these four days, for nine times an hour[179]
        He takes a black-lead comb, and kembs it over:
        Three quarters of his beard is under fifty;
        There’s but a little tuft of fourscore left,
        All of one side, which will be black by Monday.

                           _Enter_ LYSANDER.

        And, to approve my truth, see where he comes!
        Laugh softly, gentlemen, and look upon him.
                                               [_They go aside._
          SIM. Now, by this hand, he’s almost black i’the mouth,
           indeed.
          FIRST COURT. He should die shortly, then.
          SIM. Marry, methinks he dies too fast already,
        For he was all white but a week ago.
          FIRST COURT. O, this same coney-white takes an
             excellent black,
        Too soon, a mischief on’t!
          SECOND COURT. He will beguile[180]
        Us all, if that little tuft northward turn black too.
          EUG. Nay, sir, I wonder ’tis so long a turning.
          SIM. May be some fairy’s child, held forth at
             midnight,
        Has piss’d upon that side.
          FIRST COURT. Is this the beard?
          LYS. Ah, sirrah? my young boys, I shall be for you:
        This little mangy tuft takes up more time
        Than all the beard beside. Come you a wooing,
        And I alive and lusty? you shall find
        An alteration, jack-boys; I have a spirit yet,
        (And[181] I could match my hair to’t, there’s the
           fault,[182])
        And can do offices of youth yet lightly;
        At least, I will do, though it pain me a little.
        Shall not a man, for a little foolish age,
        Enjoy his wife to himself? must young court tits
        Play tomboys’ tricks with her, and he live? ha!
        I have blood that will not bear’t; yet, I confess,
        I should be at my prayers—but where’s the dancer, there!

                        _Enter_ DANCING-MASTER.

          MAST. Here, sir.
          LYS. Come, come, come, one trick a day,
        And I shall soon recover all again.
          EUG. ’Slight, and[183] you laugh too loud, we are all
             discover’d.[184]
          SIM. And I have a scurvy grinning[185] laugh a’ mine
             own,
        Will spoil all, I am afraid.
          EUG. Marry, take heed, sir.
          SIM. Nay, and[186] I should be hang’d, I cannot[187]
             leave it;
        Pup!—there ’tis.                [_Bursts into a laugh._
          EUG. Peace! O, peace!
          LYS. Come, I am ready, sir.
        I hear the church-book’s lost where I was born too,
        And that shall set me back one[188] twenty years;
        There is no little comfort left in that:
        And—[then] my three court-codlings, that look parboil’d,
        As if they came from Cupid’s scalding-house——
          SIM. He means me specially, I hold my life.
          MAST. What trick will your old worship learn this
             morning, sir?
          LYS. Marry, a trick, if thou couldst teach a man,
        To keep his wife to himself; I’d fain learn that.
          MAST. That’s a hard trick, for an old man specially;
        The horse-trick comes the nearest.
          LYS. Thou sayst true, i’faith,
        They must be hors’d indeed, else there’s no keeping on
           ’em,
        And horse-play at fourscore is not so ready.
          MAST. Look you, here’s your worship’s horse-
             trick,[189] sir.                [_Gives a spring._
          LYS. Nay, say not so,
        ’Tis none of mine; I fall down horse and man,
        If I but offer at it.
          MAST. My life for yours, sir.
          LYS. Sayst thou me so?              [_Springs aloft._
          MAST. Well offer’d, by my viol, sir.
          LYS. A pox of this horse-trick! ’t has play’d the jade
             with me,
        And given me a wrench i’the back.
          MAST. Now here’s your inturn, and your trick above
             ground.
          LYS. Prithee, no more, unless thou hast a mind
        To lay me under ground; one of these tricks
        Is enough in a morning.
          MAST. For your galliard, sir,
        You are complete enough, ay, and may challenge
        The proudest coxcomb of ’em all, I’ll stand to’t.
          LYS. Faith, and I’ve other weapons for the rest too:
        I have prepar’d for ’em, if e’er I take
        My Gregories here again.
          SIM. O, I shall burst,
        I can hold out no longer.
          EUG. He spoils all.             [_They come forward._
          LYS. The devil and his grinners! are you come?
        Bring forth the weapons, we shall find you play;
        All feats of youth too, jack-boys, feats of youth,
        And these the weapons, drinking, fencing, dancing:
        Your own road-ways, you glyster-pipes! I’m old, you say;
        Yes, parlous old, kids, and[190] you mark me well!
        This beard cannot get children, you lank suck-eggs,
        Unless such weasels come from court to help us.
        We will get our own brats, you lecherous dog-bolts!

              _Enter a_ SERVANT _with foils and glasses_.

        Well said, down with ’em; now we shall see your spirits.
        What! dwindle you already?
          SECOND COURT. I have no quality.
          SIM. Nor I, unless drinking may be reckon’d for one.
          FIRST COURT. Why, Sim, it shall.
          LYS. Come, dare you choose your weapon now?
          FIRST COURT. I? dancing, sir, and[191] you will be so
             hasty.
          LYS. We’re for you, sir.
          SECOND COURT. Fencing, I.
          LYS. We’ll answer you too.
          SIM. I am for drinking; your wet weapon there.
          LYS. That wet one has cost many a princox life;
        And I will send it through you with a powder!
          SIM. Let [it] come, with a pox! I care not, so’t be
             drink.
        I hope my guts will hold, and that’s e’en all
        A gentleman can look for of such trillibubs.[192]
          LYS. Play the first weapon; come, strike, strike, I
             say.
        Yes, yes, you shall be first; I’ll observe court rules:
        Always the worst goes foremost, so ’twill prove, I hope.
                       [FIRST COURTIER _dances a galliard_.[193]
         So, sir! you’ve spit your poison; now come I.
        Now, forty years go[194] backward and assist me,
        Fall from me half my age, but for three minutes,
        That I may feel no crick! I will put fair for’t,
        Although I hazard twenty sciaticas.          [_Dances._
        So, I have hit you.
          FIRST COURT. You’ve done well, i’faith, sir.
          LYS. If you confess it well, ’tis excellent,
        And I have hit you soundly; I am warm now:
        The second weapon instantly.
          SECOND COURT. What, so quick, sir?
        Will you not allow yourself a breathing-time?
          LYS. I’ve breath enough at all times, Lucifer’s musk-
             cod,
        To give your perfum’d worship three vennies:[195]
        A sound old man puts his thrust better home
        Than a spic’d young man: there I.        [_They fence._
          SECOND COURT. Then have at you, fourscore.
          LYS. You lie, twenty, I hope, and you shall find it.
          SIM. I’m glad I miss’d this weapon, I[’d] had an eye
        Popt out ere this time, or my two butter-teeth
        Thrust down my throat instead of a flap-dragon.[196]
          LYS. There’s two, pentweezle.            [_Hits him._
          MAST. Excellently touch’d, sir.
          SECOND COURT. Had ever man such luck! speak your
             opinion, gentlemen.
          SIM. Methinks, your luck’s good, that your eyes are in
             still;
        Mine would have dropt out, like a pig’s half-roasted.
          LYS. There wants a third—and there it is[197] again!
                                             [_Hits him again._'
          SECOND COURT. The devil has steel’d him.
          EUG. What a strong fiend is jealousy!
          LYS. You’re despatch’d, bear-whelp.
          SIM. Now comes my weapon in.
          LYS. Here, toadstool, here.
        ’Tis you[198] and I must play these three wet
           vennies.[199]
          SIM. Vennies in Venice glasses! let ’em come,
        They’ll bruise no flesh, I’m sure, nor break no bones.
          SECOND COURT. Yet you may drink your eyes out, sir.
          SIM. Ay, but that’s nothing;
        Then they go voluntarily: I do not
        Love to have ’em thrust out, whether they will or no.
          LYS. Here’s your first weapon, duck’s-meat.
          SIM. How! a Dutch what-you-call-’em,
        Stead of a German faulchion! a shrewd weapon,
        And, of all things, hard to be taken down:
        Yet down it must, I have a nose goes into’t;
        I shall drink double, I think.
          FIRST COURT. The sooner off, Sim.
          LYS. I’ll pay you speedily, —— with a trick[200]
        I learnt once amongst drunkards; here’s [a] half-pike.
                                                      [_Drinks._
          SIM. Half-pike comes well after Dutch what-you-call-
             ’em,
        They’d never be asunder by their good will.[201]
          FIRST COURT. Well pull’d of an old fellow!
          LYS. O, but your fellows
        Pull better at a rope.
          FIRST COURT. There’s a hair, Sim,
        In that glass.
          SIM. An’t be as long as a halter, down it goes;
        No hair shall cross me.                       [_Drinks._
          LYS. I[’ll] make you stink worse than your pole-cats
             do:
        Here’s long-sword, your last weapon.
                                        [_Offers him the glass._
          SIM. No more weapons.
          FIRST COURT. Why, how now, Sim? bear up, thou sham’st
             us all, else.
          SIM. [’S]light, I shall shame you worse, and[202] I
             stay longer.
        I ha’ got the scotomy[203] in my head already,
        The whimsey: you all turn round—do not you dance,
           gallants?
          SECOND COURT. Pish! what’s all this? why, Sim, look,
             the last venny.[204]
          SIM. No more vennies go[205] down here, for these two
        Are coming up again.
          SECOND COURT. Out! the disgrace of drinkers!
          SIM. Yes, ’twill out;
        Do you smell nothing yet?
          FIRST COURT. Smell!
          SIM. Farewell quickly, then;
        You[206] will do, if I stay.                   [_Exit._
          FIRST COURT. A foil go with thee!
          LYS. What, shall we put down youth at her own virtues?
        Beat folly in her own ground? wondrous much!
        Why may not we be held as full sufficient
        To love our own wives then, get our own children,
        And live in free peace till we be dissolv’d,
        For such spring butterflies that are gaudy-wing’d,
        But no more substance than those shamble-flies
        Which butchers’ boys snap between sleep and waking?
        Come but to crush you once, you are[207] but maggots,
        For all your beamy outsides!

                           _Enter_ CLEANTHES.

          EUG. Here’s Cleanthes;
        He comes to chide;—let him alone a little,
        Our cause will be reveng’d; look, look, his face
        Is set for stormy weather; do but mark
        How the clouds gather in ’t, ’twill pour down straight.
          CLEAN. Methinks, I partly know you, that’s my grief.
        Could you not all be lost? that had been handsome;
        But to be known at all, ’tis more than shameful.
        Why, was not your name wont to be Lysander?
          LYS. ’Tis so still, coz.
          CLEAN. Judgment, defer thy coming! else this man’s
             miserable.
          EUG. I told you there would be a shower anon.
          SECOND COURT. We’ll in, and hide our noddles.
                              [_Exeunt_ EUGENIA _and_ COURTIERS.
          CLEAN. What devil brought this colour to your mind,
        Which, since your childhood, I ne’er saw you wear?
        [Sure] you were ever of an innocent gloss
        Since I was ripe for knowledge, and would you lose it,
        And change the livery of saints and angels
        For this mixt monstrousness; to force a ground
        That has been so long hallow’d like a temple,
        To bring forth fruits of earth now; and turn back[208]
        To the wild cries of lust, and the complexion
        Of sin in act, lost and long since repented!
        Would you begin a work ne’er yet attempted,
        To pull time backward?
        See what your wife will do! are your wits perfect?
          LYS. My wits!
          CLEAN. I like it ten times worse; for’t had been safer
        Now to be mad,[209] and more excusable:
        I hear you dance again, and do strange follies.
          LYS. I must confess I have been put to some, coz.
          CLEAN. And yet you are not mad! pray, say not so;
        Give me that comfort of you, that you are mad,
        That I may think you are at worst; for if
        You are not mad, I then must guess you have
        The first of some disease was never heard of,
        Which may be worse than madness, and more fearful:
        You’d weep to see yourself else, and your care
        To pray would quickly turn you white again.
        I had a father, had he liv’d his month out,
        But to ha’ seen this most prodigious folly,
        There needed not the law to have him cut off;
        The sight of this had prov’d his executioner,
        And broke his heart: he would have held it equal
        Done to a sanctuary,—for what is age
        But the holy place of life, chapel of ease
        For all men’s wearied miseries? and to rob
        That of her ornament, it is accurst
        As from a priest to steal a holy vestment,
        Ay, and convert it to a sinful covering.
                                               [_Exit_ LYSANDER.
         I see’t has done him good; blessing go with it,
        Such as may make him pure again.

                          _Re-enter_ EUGENIA.

          EUG. ’Twas bravely touch’d, i’faith, sir.
          CLEAN. O, you’re welcome.
          EUG. Exceedingly well handled.
          CLEAN. ’Tis to you I come; he fell but i’ my way.
          EUG. You mark’d his beard, cousin?
          CLEAN. Mark me.
          EUG. Did you ever see a hair so changed?
          CLEAN. I must be forc’d to wake her loudly too,
        The devil has rock’d her so fast asleep.—Strumpet!
          EUG. Do you call, sir?
          CLEAN. Whore!
          EUG. How do you, sir?
          CLEAN. Be I ne’er so well,
        I must be sick of thee; thou’rt a disease
        That stick’st to th’ heart,—as all such women are.
          EUG. What ails our kindred?
          CLEAN. Bless me, she sleeps still!
        What a dead modesty is i’ this woman,
        Will never blush again! Look on thy work
        But with a Christian eye, ’twould turn thy heart
        Into a shower of blood, to be the cause
        Of that old man’s destruction; think upon’t,
        Ruin eternally; for, through thy loose follies,
        Heaven has found him a faint servant lately:
        His goodness has gone backward, and engender’d
        With his old sins again; has[210] lost his prayers,
        And all the tears that were companions with ’em:
        And like a blindfold man, (giddy and blinded,)
        Thinking he goes right on still, swerves but one foot,
        And turns to the same place where he set out;
        So he, that took his farewell of the world,
        And cast the joys behind him, out of sight,
        Summ’d up his hours, made even with time and men,
        Is now in heart arriv’d at youth again,
        All by thy wildness: thy too hasty lust
        Has driven him to this strong apostacy.
        Immodesty like thine was never equall’d:
        I’ve heard of women, (shall I call ’em so?)
        Have welcom’d suitors ere the corpse were cold;
        But thou, thy husband living:—thou’rt[211] too bold.
          EUG. Well, have you done now, sir?
          CLEAN. Look, look! she smiles yet.
          EUG. All this is nothing to a mind resolv’d;
        Ask any woman that, she’ll tell you so much:
        You have only shewn a pretty saucy wit,
        Which I shall not forget, nor to requite it.
        You shall hear from me shortly.
          CLEAN. Shameless woman!
        I take my counsel from thee, ’tis too honest,
        And leave thee wholly to thy stronger master:
        Bless the sex of thee from thee! that’s my prayer.
        Were all like thee, so impudently common,
        No man would [e’er] be found to wed a woman.   [_Exit._
          EUG. I’ll fit you gloriously.
        He that attempts to take away my pleasure,
        I’ll take away his joy; and I can sure.
        His conceal’d father pays for’t: I’ll e’en tell
        Him that I mean to make my husband next,
        And he shall tell the duke—mass, here he comes.

                         _Re-enter_ SIMONIDES.

          SIM. Has[212] had a bout with me too.
          EUG. What! no? since, sir?
          SIM. A flirt, a little flirt; he call’d me strange
             names,
        But I ne’er minded him.
          EUG. You shall quit him, sir,
        When he as little minds you.
          SIM. I like that well.
        I love to be reveng’d when no one thinks of me;
        There’s little danger that way.
          EUG. This is it then;
        He you shall strike, your stroke shall be profound,
        And yet your foe not guess who gave the wound.
          SIM. A’ my troth, I love to give such wounds.
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


                           _Before a Tavern._

         _Enter_ GNOTHO, BUTLER, BAILIFF, TAILOR, COOK, DRAWER,
                            _and_ COURTEZAN.

          DRAW. Welcome, gentlemen; will you not draw
        near? will you drink at door, gentlemen?
          BUT. O, the summer air’s best.
          DRAW. What wine will[’t] please you drink, gentlemen?
          BUT. De Clare, sirrah.                [_Exit_ DRAWER.
          GNOTH. What, you’re all sped already, bullies?
          COOK. My widow’s a’ the spit, and half ready,
        lad; a turn or two more, and I have done with her.
          GNOTH. Then, cook, I hope you have basted her
        before this time.
          COOK. And stuck her with rosemary too, to
        sweeten her; she was tainted ere she came to my
        hands. What an old piece of flesh of fifty-nine,
        eleven months, and upwards! she must needs be
        fly-blown.
          GNOTH. Put her off, put her off, though you lose
        by her; the weather’s hot.
          COOK. Why, drawer!

                           _Re-enter_ DRAWER.

          DRAW. By and by:—here, gentlemen, here’s the
        quintessence of Greece; the sages never drunk better
        grape.
          COOK. Sir, the mad Greeks of this age can taste their
        Palermo as well as the sage Greeks did before ’em.—Fill,
        lick-spiggot.
          DRAW. _Ad imum_, sir.
          GNOTH. My friends, I must doubly invite you all, the
        fifth of the next month, to the funeral of my first
        wife, and to the marriage of my second, my two to one;
        this is she.
          COOK. I hope some of us will be ready for the funeral of
        our wives by that time, to go with thee: but shall they
        be both of a day?
          GNOTH. O, best of all, sir; where sorrow and joy meet
        together, one will help away with another the better.
        Besides, there will be charges saved too; the same
        rosemary that serves for the funeral will serve for the
        wedding.
          BUT. How long do you make account to be a widower, sir?
          GNOTH. Some half an hour; long enough a’ conscience.
        Come, come, let’s have some agility; is there no music
        in the house?
          DRAW. Yes, sir, here are sweet wire-drawers in the
        house.
          COOK. O, that makes them and you seldom part; you are
        wine-drawers, and they wire-drawers.
          TAIL. And both govern by the pegs too.
          GNOTH. And you have pipes in your consort[213] too.
          DRAW. And sackbuts too, sir.
          BUT. But the heads of your instruments differ; yours are
        hogs-heads, their[s] cittern and gittern-heads.
          BAIL. All wooden heads; there they meet again.
          COOK. Bid ’em strike up, we’ll have a dance,
        Gnotho;[214] come, thou shalt foot[215] it too.
                                                [_Exit_ DRAWER.
          GNOTH. No dancing with me, we have Siren here.
          COOK. Siren! ’twas Hiren, the fair Greek,[216] man.
          GNOTH. Five drachmas of that. I say Siren, the fair
        Greek, and so are all fair Greeks.
          COOK. A match; five drachmas her name was Hiren.
          GNOTH. Siren’s name was Siren, for five drachmas.
          COOK. ’Tis done.
          TAIL. Take heed what you do, Gnotho.[217]
          GNOTH. Do not I know our own countrywomen, Siren and
        Nell of Greece, two of the fairest Greeks that ever
        were?
          COOK. That Nell was Helen of Greece too.
          GNOTH. As long as she tarried with her husband, she was
        Ellen; but after she came to Troy, she was Nell of Troy,
        or Bonny Nell, whether you will or no.
          TAIL. Why, did she grow shor[t]er when she came to Troy?
          GNOTH. She grew longer,[218] if you mark the story. When
        she grew to be an ell, she was deeper than any yard of
        Troy could reach by a quarter; there was Cressid was
        Troy weight, and Nell was avoirdupois;[219] she held
        more, by four ounces, than Cressida.
          BAIL. They say she caused many wounds to be given in
        Troy.
          GNOTH. True, she was wounded there herself, and cured
        again by plaster of Paris; and ever since that has been
        used to stop holes with.

                           _Re-enter_ DRAWER.

          DRAW. Gentlemen, if you be disposed to be merry, the
        music is ready to strike up; and here’s a consort[220]
        of mad Greeks, I know not whether they be men or
        women, or between both; they have, what-you-call-’em,
        wizards[221] on their faces.
          COOK. Vizards, good man lick-spiggot.
          BUT. If they be wise women, they may be wizards too.
          DRAW. They desire to enter amongst any merry company of
        gentlemen good-fellows, for a strain or two.

               _Enter old_ WOMEN _and_ AGATHA _in masks_.

          COOK. We’ll strain ourselves with ’em, say; let ’em
        come, Gnotho;[222] now for the honour of Epire!
          GNOTH. No[223] dancing with me, we have Siren here.
                   [_A dance by the old_ WOMEN _and_ AGATHA;
                    _they offer to take the men, all agree
                    except_ GNOTHO, _who sits with the_
                    COURTEZAN.[224]
          COOK. Ay! so kind! then every one his wench to his
        several room; Gnotho,[225] we are all provided now, as
        you are.
                      [_Exeunt all but_ GNOTHO, COURTEZAN, _and_
                         AGATHA.
          GNOTH. I shall have two, it seems: away! I have Siren
        here already.
          AGA. What, a mermaid?[226]     [_Takes off her mask._
          GNOTH. No, but a maid, horse-face: O old woman! is it
        you?
          AGA. Yes, ’tis I; all the rest have gulled themselves,
        and taken their own wives, and shall know that they have
        done more than they can well answer; but I pray you,
        husband, what are you doing?
          GNOTH. Faith, thus should I do, if thou wert dead, old
        Ag; and thou hast not long to live, I’m sure: we have
        Siren here.
          AGA. Art thou so shameless, whilst I am living, to keep
        one under my nose?
          GNOTH. No, Ag, I do prize her far above thy nose; if
        thou wouldst lay me both thine eyes in my hand to boot,
        I’ll not leave her: art not ashamed to be seen in a
        tavern, and hast scarce a fortnight to live? O old
        woman, what art thou? must thou find no time to think of
        thy end?
          AGA. O unkind villain!
          GNOTH. And then, sweetheart, thou shalt have two new
        gowns; and the best of this old[227] woman’s shall make
        thee raiments for the working days.
          AGA. O rascal! dost thou quarter my clothes already too?
          GNOTH. Her ruffs will serve thee for nothing but to wash
        dishes; for thou shalt have thine[228] of the new
        fashion.
          AGA. Impudent villain! shameless harlot!
          GNOTH. You may hear, she never wore any but rails all
        her lifetime.
          AGA. Let me come, I’ll tear the strumpet from him.
          GNOTH. Darest thou call my wife strumpet, thou
        preterpluperfect tense of a woman! I’ll make thee do
        penance in the sheet thou shalt be buried in; abuse my
        choice, my two to one!
          AGA. No, unkind villain! I’ll deceive thee yet;
        I have a reprieve for five years of life;
        I am with child.
          COURT. Cud so, Gnotho,[229] I’ll not tarry so long; five
        years! I may bury two husbands by that time.
          GNOTH. Alas! give the poor woman leave to talk: she with
        child! ay, with a puppy: as long as I have thee by me,
        she shall not be with child, I warrant thee.
          AGA. The law, and thou, and all, shall find I am with
        child.
          GNOTH. I’ll take my corporal oath I begat it not, and
        then thou diest for adultery.
          AGA. No matter, that will ask some time in the proof.
          GNOTH. O, you’d be stoned to death, would you? all old
        women would die a’ that fashion with all their hearts;
        but the law shall overthrow you the tother way, first.
          COURT. Indeed, if it be so, I will not linger so long,
        Gnotho.[230]
          GNOTH. Away, away! some botcher has got it; ’tis but a
        cushion, I warrant thee: the old woman is _loath to
        depart_[231]; she never sung other tune in her life.
          COURT. We will not have our noses bored with a cushion,
        if it be so.
          GNOTH. Go, go thy ways, thou old almanac at the twenty-
        eighth day of December, e’en almost out of date! Down on
        thy knees, and make thee ready; sell some of thy clothes
        to buy thee a death’s head, and put upon thy middle
        finger: your least-considering bawd does[232] so much;
        be not thou worse, though thou art an old woman, as she
        is: I am cloyed with old stock-fish; here’s a young
        perch is sweeter meat by half: prithee, die before thy
        day, if thou canst, that thou mayst not be counted a
        witch.
          AGA. No, thou art a witch, and I’ll prove it: I said I
        was with child, thou knewest no other but by sorcery:
        thou saidst it was a cushion, and so it is; thou art a
        witch for’t, I’ll be sworn to’t.
          GNOTH. Ha, ha, ha! I told thee ’twas a cushion. Go, get
        thy sheet ready; we’ll see thee buried as we go to
        church to be married.
                              [_Exeunt_ GNOTHO _and_ COURTEZAN.
          AGA. Nay, I’ll follow thee, and shew myself a wife. I’ll
        plague thee as long as I live with thee; and I’ll bury
        some money before I die,[233] that my ghost may haunt
        thee afterward.                                [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                        _The Country. A Forest._

                           _Enter_ CLEANTHES.

          CLEAN. What’s that? O, nothing but the whispering wind
        Breathes through yon churlish hawthorn, that grew rude,
        As if it chid the gentle breath that kiss’d it.
        I cannot be too circumspect, too careful;
        For in these woods lies hid all my life’s treasure,
        Which is too much [n]ever to fear to lose,
        Though[234] it be never lost: and if our watchfulness
        Ought to be wise and serious ’gainst[235] a thief
        That comes to steal our goods, things all without us,
        That prove[236] vexation often more than comfort;
        How mighty ought our providence to be,
        To prevent those, if any such there were,
        That come to rob our bosom of our joys,
        That only make[237] poor man delight to live!
        Pshaw! I’m too fearful—fie, fie! who can hurt me?
        But ’tis a general cowardice, that shakes
        The nerves of confidence: he that hides treasure,
        Imagines every one thinks of that place,
        When ’tis a thing least minded; nay, let him change
        The place continually; where’er it keeps,
        There will the fear keep still: yonder’s the store-house
        Of all my comfort now—and see! it sends forth

                   _Enter_ HIPPOLITA _from the Wood._

        A dear one to me:—Precious chief of women,
        How does the good old soul? has he fed well?
          HIP. Beshrew me, sir, he made the heartiest meal to-
             day—
        Much good may’t do his health.
          CLEAN. A blessing on thee,
        Both for thy news and wish!
          HIP. His stomach, sir,
        Is better’d wondrously since his concealment.
          CLEAN. Heaven has a blessed work in’t. Come, we’re
             safe here;
        I prithee, call him forth; the air’s much wholesomer.
          HIP. Father!

                           _Enter_ LEONIDES.

          LEON. How[238] sweetly sounds the voice of a good
           woman!
        It is so seldom heard, that, when it speaks,
        It ravishes all senses. Lists of honour!
        I’ve a joy weeps to see you, ’tis so full,
        So fairly fruitful.
          CLEAN. I hope to see you often and return
        Loaden with blessings, still to pour on some;
        I find ’em all in my contented peace,
        And lose not one in thousands; they’re disperst
        So gloriously, I know not which are brightest.
        I find ’em, as angels are found, by legions:
        First, in the love and honesty of a wife,
        Which is the chiefest[239] of all temporal blessings;
        Next, in yourself, which is the hope and joy
        Of all my actions, my affairs, my wishes;
        And lastly, which crowns all, I find my soul
        Crown’d with the peace of ’em, th’ eternal riches,
        Man’s only portion for his heavenly marriage!
          LEON. Rise; thou art all obedience, love, and
             goodness.
        I dare say that which thousand fathers cannot,
        And that’s my precious comfort; never son
        Was in the way more of celestial rising:
        Thou art so made of such ascending virtue,
        That all the powers of hell can’t[240] sink thee.
                                       [_A horn sounded within._
          CLEAN. Ha!
          LEON. What was’t disturb’d my joy?
          CLEAN. Did you not hear,
        As afar off?
          LEON. What, my excellent comfort?[241]
          CLEAN. Nor you?
          HIP. I heard a ——                          [_A horn._
          CLEAN. Hark, again!
          LEON. Bless my joy,
        What ails it on a sudden?
          CLEAN. Now? since lately?
          LEON. ’Tis nothing but a symptom of thy care, man.
          CLEAN. Alas, you do not hear well!
          LEON. What was’t, daughter?
          HIP. I heard a sound twice.                [_A horn._
          CLEAN. Hark! louder and nearer:
        In, for the precious good of virtue, quick, sir!
        Louder and nearer yet! at hand, at hand!
                                               [_Exit_ LEONIDES.
         A hunting here! ’tis strange: I never knew
        Game follow’d in these woods before.

         _Enter_ EVANDER, SIMONIDES, COURTIERS, _and_ CRATILUS.

          HIP. Now let ’em come, and spare not.
          CLEAN. Ha! ’tis—is’t not the duke?—look sparingly.
          HIP. ’Tis he; but what of that? alas, take heed, sir;
        Your care will overthrow us.
          CLEAN. Come, it shall not:
        Let’s set a pleasant face upon our fears,
        Though our hearts shake with horror.—Ha, ha, ha!
          EVAN. Hark!
          CLEAN. Prithee, proceed;
        I’m taken with these light things infinitely,
        Since the old man’s decease; ha!—so they parted? ha, ha,
           ha!
          EVAN. Why, how should I believe this? look, he’s
             merry,
        As if he had no such charge: one with that care
        Could never be so; still he holds his temper,
        And ’tis the same still (with no difference)
        He brought his father’s corpse to the grave with;
        He laugh’d thus then, you know.
          FIRST COURT. Ay, he may laugh, my lord,
        That shews but how he glories in his cunning;
        And [is], perhaps, done more to advance his wit,
        That only he has over-reach’d the law,[242]
        Than to express affection to his father.
          SIM. He tells you right, my lord; his own cousin-
             german
        Reveal’d it first to me; a free-tongued woman,
        And very excellent at telling secrets.
          EVAN. If a contempt can be so neatly carried,
        It gives me cause of wonder.
          SIM. Troth, my lord,
        ’Twill prove a delicate cozening, I believe:
        I’d have no scrivener offer to come near it.
          EVAN. Cleanthes.
          CLEAN. My lov’d lord.
          EVAN. Not mov’d a whit,
        Constant to lightness[243] still! ’Tis strange to meet
           you
        Upon a ground so unfrequented, sir:
        This does not fit your passion; you’re for mirth,
        Or I mistake you much.
          CLEAN. But finding it
        Grow to a noted imperfection in me,
        For any thing too much is vicious,
        I come to these disconsolate walks, of purpose,
        Only to dull and take away the edge on’t.
        I ever had a greater zeal to sadness,
        A natural propension,[244] I confess, my lord,
        Before that cheerful accident fell out—
        If I may call a father’s funeral cheerful,
        Without wrong done to duty or my love.
          EVAN. It seems, then, you take pleasure i’these walks,
             sir.
          CLEAN. Contemplative content I do, my lord:
        They bring into my mind oft meditations
        So sweetly precious, that, in the parting,
        I find a shower of grace upon my cheeks,
        They take their leave so feelingly.
          EVAN. So, sir!
          CLEAN. Which is a kind of grave delight, my lord.
          EVAN. And I’ve small cause, Cleanthes, to[245] afford
             you
        The least delight that has a name.
          CLEAN. My lord!
          SIM. Now it begins to fadge.
          FIRST COURT. Peace! thou art so greedy, Sim.
          EVAN. In your excess of joy you have express’d
        Your rancour and contempt against my law:
        Your smiles deserve [a] fining; you’ve profess’d
        Derision openly, e’en to my face,
        Which might be death, a little more incensed.
        You do not come for any freedom here,
        But for a project of your own:—
        But all that’s known to be contentful to thee,
        Shall in the use prove deadly. Your life’s mine,
        If ever thy presumption do but lead thee
        Into these walks again,—ay, or that woman;
        I’ll have ’em watch’ a’ purpose.

                 [CLEANTHES _retires from the wood, followed by_
                       HIPPOLITA.

          FIRST COURT. Now, now, his colour ebbs and flows.
          SIM. Mark her’s too.
          HIP. O, who shall bring food to the poor old man, now!
        Speak somewhat, good sir, or we’re lost for ever.
          CLEAN. O, you did wondrous ill to call me again!
        There are not words to help us; if I entreat,
        ’Tis found; that will betray us worse than silence:
        Prithee, let heaven alone, and let’s say nothing.
          FIRST COURT. You’ve struck ’em dumb, my lord.
          SIM. Look how guilt looks!
        I would not have that fear upon my flesh,
        To save ten fathers.
          CLEAN. He is safe still, is he not?
          HIP. O, you do ill to doubt it.
          CLEAN. Thou art all goodness.
          SIM. Now does your grace believe?
          EVAN. ’Tis too apparent.
        Search, make a speedy search; for the imposture
        Cannot be far off, by the fear it sends.
          CLEAN. Ha!
          SIM. Has[246] the lapwing’s cunning, I’m afraid, my
             lord,
        That cries most[247] when she’s farthest from the nest.
          CLEAN. O, we’re betray’d!
          HIP. Betray’d, sir!
          SIM. See, my lord,
        It comes out more and more still.
                    [SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS _enter the wood_.
          CLEAN. Bloody thief!
        Come from that place; ’tis sacred, homicide!
        ’Tis not for thy adulterate hands to touch it.
          HIP. O miserable virtue, what distress
        Art thou in at this minute!
          CLEAN. Help me, thunder,
        For my power’s lost! angels, shoot plagues, and help me!
        Why are these men in health, and I so heart-sick?
        Or why should nature have that power in me
        To levy up a thousand bleeding sorrows,
        And not one comfort? only make[248] me lie
        Like the poor mockery of an earthquake here,
        Panting with horror,
        And have not so much force in all my vengeance,
        To shake a villain off me.[249]

         _Re-enter_ SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS _with_ LEONIDES.

          HIP. Use him gently,
        And heaven will love you for’t.
          CLEAN. Father! O father! now I see thee full
        In thy affliction[250]; thou’rt a man of sorrow,
        But reverently becom’st it, that’s my comfort:
        Extremity was never better grac’d
        Than with that look of thine; O, let me look still,
        For I shall lose it! all my joy and strength
           [_Kneels._
        Is e’en eclips’d together. I transgress’d
        Your law, my lord, let me receive the sting on’t;
        Be once just, sir, and let the offender die:
        He’s innocent in all, and I am guilty.
          LEON. Your grace knows, when affection only speaks,
        Truth is not always there; his love would draw
        An undeserved misery on his youth,
        And wrong a peace resolv’d, on both parts sinful.
        ’Tis I am guilty of my own concealment,
        And, like a worldly coward, injur’d heaven
        With fear to go to’t:—now I see my fault,
        I am prepar’d with joy to suffer for’t.
          EVAN. Go, give him quick despatch, let him see death:
        And your presumption, sir, shall come to judgment.
                       [_Exeunt_ EVANDER, COURTIERS, SIMONIDES;
                          _and_ CRATILUS _with_ LEONIDES.
          HIP. He’s going! O, he’s gone, sir!
          CLEAN. Let me rise.
          HIP. Why do you not then, and follow?
          CLEAN. I strive for’t:
        Is there no hand of pity that will ease me,
        And take this villain from my heart awhile?   [_Rises._
          HIP. Alas! he’s gone.
          CLEAN. A worse supplies his place then,
        A weight more ponderous; I cannot follow.
          HIP. O misery of affliction!
          CLEAN. They will stay
        Till I can come; they must be so good ever,
        Though they be ne’er so cruel:
        My last leave must be taken, think a’ that,
        And his[251] last blessing given; I will not lose
        That for a thousand comforts.[252]
          HIP. That hope’s wretched.
          CLEAN. The unutterable stings of fortune!
        All griefs are to be borne save this alone;
        This, like a headlong torrent, overturns
        The frame of nature:
        For he that gives us life first, as a father,
        Locks all his natural sufferings in our blood;
        The sorrows that he feels are our heart’s too,[253]
        They are incorporate to us.
          HIP. Noble sir!
          CLEAN. Let me behold thee[254] well.
          HIP. Sir!
          CLEAN. Thou shouldst be good,
        Or thou’rt a dangerous substance to be lodg’d
        So near the heart of man.
          HIP. What means this, dear sir?
          CLEAN. To thy trust only was this blessed secret
        Kindly committed; ’tis destroy’d, thou seest;
        What follows to be thought on’t?
          HIP. Miserable!
        Why, here’s th’ unhappiness of woman still,
        That, having forfeited in old times her[255] trust,
        Now makes their faiths suspected that are just.
          CLEAN. What shall I say to all my sorrows then,
        That look for satisfaction?

                            _Enter_ EUGENIA.

          EUG. Ha, ha, ha! cousin.
          CLEAN. How ill dost thou become this time!
          EUG. Ha, ha, ha!
        Why, that’s but your opinion; a young wench
        Becomes the time at all times.
        Now, coz, we’re even: and[256] you be remember’d,
        You left a _strumpet_ and a _whore_ at home with me,
        And such fine field-bed words, which could not cost you
        Less than a father.
          CLEAN. Is it come that way?
          EUG. Had you an uncle,
        He should go the same way too.
          CLEAN. O eternity!
        What monster is this fiend in labour with?
          EUG. An ass-colt with two heads, that’s she and you:
        I will not lose so glorious a revenge,
        Not to be understood in’t; I betray[’d] him;
        And now we’re even, you’d best keep you so.
          CLEAN. Is there not poison yet enough to kill me?
          HIP. O sir, forgive me! it was I betray’d him.
          CLEAN. How!
          HIP. I.
          CLEAN. The fellow of my heart! ’twill speed me, then.
          HIP. Her tears that never wept, and mine own pity
        E’en cozen’d me together, and stole from me
        This secret, which fierce death should not have
           purchas’d.
          CLEAN. Nay, then we’re at an end; all we are false
             ones,
        And ought to suffer. I was false to wisdom,
        In trusting woman; thou wert false to faith,
        In uttering of the secret; and thou false
        To goodness, in deceiving such a pity:
        We are all tainted some way, but thou worst,
        And for thy infectious spots ought[st] to die first.
                                      [_Offers to kill_ EUGENIA.
          EUG. Pray turn your weapon, sir, upon your mistress;
        I come not so ill friended.—Rescue, servants!

                 _Re-enter_ SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS.

          CLEAN. Are you so whorishly provided?
          SIM. Yes, sir,
        She has more weapons at command than one.
          EUG. Put forward, man; thou art most sure to have me.
          SIM. I shall be surer, if I keep behind, though.
          EUG. Now, servants, shew your loves.
          SIM. I’ll shew my love, too, afar off.
          EUG. I love to be so courted; woo me there.
          SIM. I love to keep good weapons, though ne’er fought
             [with].
        I’m sharper set within than I am without.
          HIP. O gentlemen! Cleanthes!
          EUG. Fight! upon him!
          CLEAN.[257] Thy thirst of blood proclaims thee now a
             strumpet.
          EUG. ’Tis dainty, next to procreation fitting;
        I’d either be destroying men or getting.

                             _Enter_ GUARD.

          FIRST OFFICER. Forbear, on your allegiance, gentlemen!
        He’s the duke’s prisoner, and we seize upon him
        To answer this contempt against the law.
          CLEAN. I obey fate in all things.
          HIP. Happy rescue!
          SIM. I would you’d seized upon him a minute sooner; ’t
        had saved me a cut finger: I wonder how I came by’t, for
        I never put my hand forth, I’m sure; I think my own
        sword did cut it, if truth were known; may be the wire
        in the handle: I have lived these five and twenty years,
        and never knew what colour my blood was before. I never
        durst eat oysters, nor cut peck-loaves.
          EUG. You have shewn your spirits, gentlemen; but you
        Have cut your finger.
          SIM. Ay, the wedding-finger too, a pox on’t!
          COURT. You’ll prove a bawdy bachelor, Sim, to have a cut
        upon your finger before you are married.
          SIM. I’ll never draw sword again, to have such a jest
        put upon me.                                 [_Exeunt._




                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                         _A Court of Justice._

           _Enter_ SIMONIDES _and_ COURTIERS, _sword and mace
                         carried before them_.

          SIM. Be ready with your prisoner; we’ll sit
             instantly,
        And rise before eleven,[258] or when we please;
        Shall we not, fellow[259]-judges?
          FIRST COURT. ’Tis committed
        All to our power, censure, and pleasure, now;
        The duke hath made us chief lords of this sessions,
        And we may speak by fits, or sleep by turns.
          SIM. Leave that to us; but, whatsoe’er we do,
        The prisoner shall be sure to be condemn’d;
        Sleeping or waking, we are resolv’d on that,
        Before we sit[260] upon him?
          SECOND COURT. Make you question
        If not?—Cleanthes! and an[261] enemy!
        Nay, a concealer of his father too!
        A vild[262] example in these days of youth.
          SIM. If they were given to follow such examples;
        But sure I think they are not: howsoever,
        ’Twas wickedly attempted; that’s my judgment,
        And it shall pass whilst I am in power to sit.
        Never by prince were such young judges made;
        But now the cause requires it: if you mark it,
        He must make young or none; for all the old ones,
        Their fathers,[263] he hath sent a fishing—and
        My father’s one, I humbly thank his highness.

                            _Enter_ EUGENIA.

          FIRST COURT. Widow![264]
          EUG. You almost hit my name no[w], gentlemen;
        You come so wondrous near it, I admire you
        For your judgment.
          SIM. My wife that must be! She.
          EUG. My husband goes upon his last hour now.
          FIRST COURT. On his last legs, I am sure.
          SIM.[265] September the seventeenth—
        I will not bate an hour on’t, and to-morrow
        His latest hour’s expir’d.
          SECOND COURT. Bring him to judgment;
        The jury’s panell’d, and the verdict given
        Ere[266] he appears; we have ta’en course for that.
          SIM. And officers to attach the gray young man,
        The youth of fourscore. Be of comfort, lady;
        You[267] shall no longer bosom January;
        For that I will take order, and provide
        For you a lusty April.
          EUG. The month that ought, indeed,
        To go before May.
          FIRST COURT. Do as we have said,
        Take a strong guard, and bring him into court.
        Lady Eugenia, see this charge perform’d,
        That, having his life forfeited by the law,
        He may relieve his soul.
          EUG. Willingly.
        From shaven chins never came better justice
        Than these ne’er touch’d by razor.[268]        [_Exit._
          SIM. What you do,
        Do suddenly, we charge you, for we purpose
        To make but a short sessions:—a new business!

                           _Enter_ HIPPOLITA.

          FIRST COURT. The fair Hippolita! now what’s your
             suit?
          HIP. Alas! I know not how to style you yet;
        To call you judges doth not suit your years,
        Nor heads and beards shew more antiquity;[269]—
        Yet sway yourselves with equity and truth,
        And I’ll proclaim you reverend, and repeat
        Once in my lifetime I have seen grave heads
        Plac’d upon young men’s shoulders.
          SECOND COURT. Hark! she flouts us,
        And thinks to make us monstrous.
          HIP. Prove not so;
        For yet, methinks, you bear the shapes of men,
        (Though nothing more than merely beauty serves[270]
        To make you appear angels); but if [you] crimson
        Your name and power with blood and cruelty,
        Suppress fair virtue, and enlarge bold[271] vice,
        Both against heaven and nature, draw your sword,
        Make either will or humour turn the soul[272]
        Of your created greatness, and in that
        Oppose all goodness, I must tell you there
        You’re more than monstrous; in the very act
        You change yourselves[273] to devils.
          FIRST COURT. She’s a witch;
        Hark! she begins to conjure.
          SIM. Time, you see,
        Is short, much business now on foot:—shall I
        Give her her answer?
          SECOND COURT. None upon the bench
        More learnedly can do it.
          SIM. He, he, hem! then list:
        I wonder at thine impudence, young huswife,
        That thou dar’st plead for such a base offender.
        Conceal a father past his time to die!
        What son and heir would have done this but he?
          FIRST COURT. I vow, not I.
          HIP. Because ye are parricides;
        And how can comfort be deriv’d from such
        That pity not their fathers?
          SECOND COURT. You are fresh and fair; practise young
             women’s ends;
        When husbands are distress’d, provide them friends.
          SIM. I’ll set him forward for thee without fee:[274]
        Some wives would pay for such a courtesy.
          HIP. Times of amazement! what duty, goodness
             dwell[275]——
        I sought for charity, but knock at hell.       [_Exit._

            _Re-enter_ EUGENIA, _and_ GUARD _with_ LYSANDER.

          SIM. Eugenia come! Command a second guard
        To bring Cleanthes in; we’ll not sit long;
        My stomach strives to dinner.[276]
          EUG. Now, servants, may a lady be so bold
        To call your power so low?
          SIM. A mistress may;
        She can make all things low; then in that language
        There can be no offence.
          EUG. The time’s now come
        Of manumissions; take him into bonds,
        And I am then at freedom.
          SECOND COURT. This the man!
        He hath left off [o’] late to feed on snakes;
        His beard’s turn’d white again.
          FIRST COURT. Is’t possible these gouty legs danc’d
             lately,
        And [s]hatter’d in a galliard?
          EUG. Jealousy
        And fear of death can work strange prodigies.
          SECOND COURT. The nimble fencer this, that made me
             tear
        And traverse ’bout the chamber?
          SIM. Ay, and gave me
        Those elbow-healths, the hangman take him for’t!
        They had almost fetch’d my heart out: the Dutch
           venny[277]
        I swallow’d pretty well; but the half-pike
        Had almost pepper’d[278] me; but had I took [long-
           sword],
        Being swollen, I had cast my lungs out.

           _A Flourish._[279] _Enter_ EVANDER _and_ CRATILUS.

          FIRST[280] COURT. Peace, the duke!
          EVAN. Nay, back t’ your seats:[281] who’s that?
          SECOND COURT. May’t please your highness, it is old
             Lysander.[282]
          EVAN. And brought in by his wife! a worthy precedent
        Of one that no way would offend the law,
        And should not pass away without remark.
        You have been look’d for long.
          LYS. But never fit
        To die till now, my lord. My sins and I
        Have been but newly parted; much ado
        I had to get them leave me, or be taught
        That difficult lesson, how to learn to die.
        I never thought there had been such an act,
        And ’tis the only discipline we are born for:
        All studies else[283] are but as circular lines,
        And death the centre where they must all meet.
        I now can look upon thee, erring woman,Cro
        And not be vex’d with jealousy; on young men,
        Pleasure, and strength; all which were once mine own,
        And mine must be theirs one day.
          EVAN. You have tam’d him.
          SIM. And know how to dispose him; that, my liege,
        Hath been before determin’d. You confess
        Yourself of full age?
          LYS. Yes, and prepar’d to inherit——
          EUG. Your place above.[284]
          SIM. Of which the hangman’s strength
        Shall put him in possession.
          LYS. ’Tis still car’d[285]
        To take me willing and in mind to die;
        And such are, when the earth grows weary of them,
        Most fit for heaven.
          SIM. The court shall make his mittimus,
        And send him thither presently: i’th’ mean time——
          EVAN. Away[286] to death with him.
                               [_Exit_ CRATILUS _with_ LYSANDER.

         _Enter_ GUARD _with_ CLEANTHES, HIPPOLITA _following,
                               weeping_.

          SIM. So! see another person brought to the bar.
          FIRST COURT. The arch-malefactor.
          SECOND COURT. The grand offender,[287] the most
             refractory
        To all good order;[288] ’tis Cleanthes, he——
          SIM. That would have sons grave fathers, ere their
             fathers
        Be sent unto their graves.
          EVAN. There will be expectation
        In your severe proceedings against him;
        His act being so capital.
          SIM. Fearful and bloody;
        Therefore we charge these women leave the court,
        Lest they should swoon[289] to hear it.
          EUG. I, in expectation
        Of a most happy freedom.                       [_Exit._
          HIP. I, with the apprehension
        Of a most sad and desolate widowhood.          [_Exit._
          FIRST COURT. We bring him to the bar——
          SECOND COURT. Hold up your hand, sir.
          CLEAN. More reverence to the place than to the
             persons:
        To the one I offer up a [spreading][290] palm
        Of duty and obedience, [a]s to heaven,
        Imploring justice, which was never wanting
        Upon that bench whilst their own fathers sat;
        But unto you, my hands contracted thus,
        As threatening vengeance against murderers,
        For they that kill in thought shed innocent blood.—
        With pardon of[291] your highness, too much passion
        Made me forget your presence, and the place
        I now am call’d to.
          EVAN. All our[292] majesty
        And power we have to pardon or condemn
        Is now conferr’d on them.
          SIM. And these we’ll use
        Little to thine advantage.
          CLEAN. I expect it:
        And as to these, I look no mercy from [them],
        And much less mean[293] to entreat it. I thus now
        Submit me [to] the emblems of your power,
        The sword and bench: but, my most reverend judges,
        Ere you proceed to sentence, (for I know
        You have given me lost,) will you resolve me one thing?
          FIRST COURT. So it be briefly question’d.
          SECOND COURT. Shew your humour;[294]
        Day spends itself apace.
          CLEAN. My lords, it shall.[295]
        Resolve me, then, where are your filial tears,
        Your mourning habits, and sad hearts become,
        That should attend your fathers’ funeral[s]?
        Though the stric[t] law (which I will not accuse,
        Because a subject) snatch’d away their lives,
        It doth not bar you[296] to lament their deaths:
        Or if you cannot spare one sad suspire,
        It doth not bid you laugh them to their graves,
        Lay subtle trains to antedate their years,
        To be the sooner seis’d of their estates.
        O, time of age! where’s that Æneas now,
        Who letting all his jewels to the flames;
        Forgetting country, kindred, treasure, friends,
        Fortunes, and all things, save the name of son,
        Which you so much forget, godlike[297] Æneas,
        Who took his bedrid father on his back,
        And with that sacred load (to him no burthen)
        Hew’d out his way through blood, through fire, through
           [arms],
        Even all the arm’d streets of bright-burning Troy,
        Only to save a father?
          SIM. We’ve[298] no leisure now
        To hear lessons read from Virgil; we’re[299] past
           school,
        And all this time thy judges.
          SECOND COURT. It is[300] fit
        That we proceed to sentence.
          FIRST COURT. You are the mouth,
        And now ’tis fit to open.
          SIM. Justice, indeed,
        Should ever be close-ear’d and open-mouth’d;
        That is, to hear a[301] little, and speak much.
        Know then, Cleanthes, there is none can be
        A good son and bad[302] subject; for, if princes
        Be call’d the people’s fathers, then the subjects
        Are all his sons, and he that flouts the prince
        Doth disobey his father: there you’re[303] gone.
          FIRST COURT. And not to be recover’d.
          SIM. And again—
          SECOND COURT. If he be gone once, call him not again.
          SIM. I say again, this act of thine expresses
        A double disobedience: as our princes
        Are fathers, so they are our sovereigns too;
        And he that doth rebel ’gainst[304] sovereignty
        Doth commit treason in the height of degree:
        And now thou art quite gone.
          FIRST COURT. Our brother in commission
        Hath spoke his mind both learnedly and neatly,
        And I can add but little; howsoever,
        It shall send him packing.
        He that begins a fault that wants example
        Ought to be made example for the fault.
          CLEAN. A fault! no longer can I hold myself
        To hear vice upheld and virtue thrown down.
        A fault! judge, I desire, then,[305] where it lieth,
        In those that are my judges, or in me:
        Heaven stand[s] on my side, pity, love, and duty.
          SIM. Where are they, sir? who sees them but yourself?
          CLEAN. Not you; and I am sure
        You never had the gracious eyes to see them.
        You think [that] you arraign me, but I hope
        To sentence you at the bar.
          SECOND COURT. That would shew brave.
          CLEAN. This were the judgment-seat we [stand at]
             now![306]
        [Of] the heaviest crimes that ever made up [sin],
        Unnaturalness and inhumanity,
        You are found foul and guilty, by a jury
        Made of your fathers’ curses, which have brought
        Vengeance impending on you; and I, now,
        Am forc’d to pronounce judgment on my judges.
        The common laws of reason and of nature
        Condemn you, _ipso facto_; you are parricides,
        And if you marry, will beget the like,[307]
        Who, when they’re[308] grown to full maturity,
        Will hurry you, their fathers, to their graves.
        Like traitors, you take council from the living,
        Of upright judgment you would rob the bench,
        (Experience and discretion snatch’d away
        From the earth’s face,) turn all into disorder,
        Imprison virtue, and infranchise vice,
        And put the sword of justice into the hands
        Of boys and madmen.
          SIM. Well, well, have you done, sir?
          CLEAN. I have spoke my thoughts.
          SIM. Then I’ll begin and end.
          EVAN. ’Tis time I now begin—
        Here[309] your commission ends.
        Cleanthes, come you[310] from the bar. Because
        I know you are[311] severally disposed, I here
        Invite you to an object will, no doubt,
        Work in you contrary effects.—Music!

            _Loud Music._ _Enter_ LEONIDES, CREON, LYSANDER,
                          _and other old men_.
          CLEAN. Pray, heaven, I dream not! sure he moves, talks
             comfortably,
        As joy can wish a man. If he be chang’d
        (Far above from me), he’s[312] not ill entreated;
        His face doth promise fulness of content,
        And glory hath a part in’t.
          LEON. O my son!
          EVAN. You that can claim acquaintance with these lads,
        Talk freely.
          SIM. I can see none there that’s worth
        One hand to you from me.
          EVAN. These are thy judges, and by their grave law
        I find thee clear, but these delinquents guilty.
        You must change places, for ’tis so decreed:
        Such just pre-eminence hath thy goodness gain’d,
        Thou art the judge now, they the men arraign’d.
                                                [_To_ CLEANTHES.
          FIRST COURT. Here’s fine dancing, gentlemen.
          SECOND COURT. Is thy father amongst them?
          SIM.[313] O, pox![314] I saw him the first thing I
             look’d on.
        Alive again! ’slight, I believe now a father
        Hath as many lives as a mother.
          CLEAN.[315] ’Tis full as blessed as ’tis wonderful.
        O, bring me back to the same law again!
        I am fouler than all these; seize on me, officers,
        And bring me to new sentence.
          SIM.[316] What’s all this?
          CLEAN. A fault not to be pardon’d,
        Unnaturalness is but sin’s shadow to it.
          SIM. I am glad of that; I hope the case may alter,
        And I turn judge again.
          EVAN. Name your offence.
          CLEAN. That I should be so vild[317]
        As once to think you cruel.
          EVAN. Is that all?
        ’Twas pardon’d ere confess’d: you that have sons,
        If they be worthy, here may challenge them.[318]
          CREON.[319] I should have one amongst them, had he had
             grace
        To have retain’d that name.
          SIM. I pray you, father.                   [_Kneels._
          CREON.[320] That name, I know, hath been long since
             forgot.
          SIM. I find but small comfort in remembering it now.
          EVAN. Cleanthes, take your place[321] with these grave
             father[s],
        And read what in that table is inscrib’d.
                                           [_Gives him a paper._
         Now set these at the bar,
        And read, Cleanthes, to the dread and terror
        Of disobedience and unnatural blood.
          CLEAN. [reads.] _It is decreed by the grave and learned
        council of Epire, that no son and heir shall be held
        capable of his inheritance at the age of one and twenty,
        unless he be at that time as mature[322] in obedience,
        manners, and goodness._
          SIM. Sure I shall never be at full age, then, though I
        live to an hundred years; and that’s nearer by twenty
        than the last statute allowed.
          FIRST COURT. A terrible act!
          CLEAN.[323] _Moreover_, [_it_] _is enacted that all sons
        aforesaid, whom either this law, or their own grace,
        shall[324] reduce into the true method of duty, virtue,
        and affection_, [_shall appear before us_][325] _and
        relate their trial and approbation from Cleanthes, the
        son of Leonides_—from me, my lord!
          EVAN. From none but you, as fullest. Proceed, sir.
          CLEAN. _Whom, for his manifest virtues, we make such
        judge and censor of youth, and the absolute reference of
        life and manners._
          SIM. This is a brave world! when a man should be selling
        land, he must be learning manners. Is’t not, my masters?

                          _Re-enter_ EUGENIA.

          EUG. What’s here to do? my suitors at the bar!
        The old band[326] shines again: O miserable!                [_She
           swoons._
          EVAN. Read the law over to her, ’twill awake her: ’Tis
        on deserves small pity.
          CLEAN. _Lastly, it is ordained, that all such wives now
        whatsoever, that shall design the[ir] husbands’ death,
        to be soon rid of them, and entertain suitors in their
        husbands’ lifetime_—
          SIM. You had best read that a little louder; for, if any
        thing, that will bring her to herself again, and find
        her tongue.
          CLEAN. _Shall not presume, on the penalty of our heavy
        displeasure, to marry within ten years after._
          EUG. That law’s too long by nine years and a half, I’ll
        take my death upon’t, so shall most women.
          CLEAN. _And those incontinent women so offending, to be
        judge[d] and censured by Hippolita, wife to Cleanthes._
          EUG. Of all the rest, I’ll not be judg[’d] by her.

                         _Re-enter_ HIPPOLITA.

          CLEAN. Ah! here she comes. Let me prevent thy joys,
        Prevent them but in part, and hide the rest;
        Thou hast not strength enough to bear them, else.
          HIP. Leonides!                         [_She faints._
          CLEAN. I fear’d it all this while;
        I knew ’twas past thy power. Hippolita!—
        What contrariety is in women’s blood!
        One faints for spleen and anger, she for grace.
          EVAN. Of sons and wives we see the worst and best.
        May[327] future ages yield Hippolitas
        Many; but few like thee, Eugenia!
        Let no Simonides henceforth have a fame,
        But all blest sons live in Cleanthes’ name—
                                          [_Harsh music within._
         Ha! what strange kind of melody was that?
        Yet give it entrance, whatsoe’er it be,
        This day is all devote to liberty.

            _Enter_ FIDDLERS, GNOTHO, COURTEZAN, COOK, BUTLER,
              _&c. with the old_ WOMEN, AGATHA, _and one bearing
              a bridecake for the wedding_.

          GNOTH. Fiddlers, crowd on, crowd on;[328] let no man
        lay a block in your way.—Crowd on, I say.
          EVAN. Stay the crowd awhile; let’s know the reason of
        this jollity.
          CLEAN. Sirrah, do you know where you are?
          GNOTH. Yes, sir; I am here, now here, and now here
        again, sir.
          LYS. Your hat[329] is too high crown’d, the duke in
        presence.
          GNOTH. The duke! as he is my sovereign, I do give him
        two crowns for it,[330] and that’s equal change all the
        world over: as I am lord of the day (being my marriage-
        day the second) I do advance [my] bonnet. Crowd on
        afore.
          LEON. Good sir, a few words, if you will[331]
             vouchsafe ’em;
        Or will you be forc’d?
          GNOTH. Forced! I would the duke himself would say so.
          EVAN. I think he dares, sir, and does; if you stay
             not,
        You shall be forc’d.
          GNOTH. I think so, my lord, and good reason too; shall
        not I stay, when your grace says I shall? I were
        unworthy to be a bridegroom in any part of your
        highness’s dominions, then: will it please you to taste
        of the wedlock-courtesy?
          EVAN. O, by no means, sir; you shall not deface
        So fair an ornament for me.
          GNOTH. If your grace please to be cakated, say so.
          EVAN. And which might be your fair bride, sir?
          GNOTH. This is my two for one that must be, [the] _uxor
        uxoris_, the remedy _doloris_, and the very _syceum
        amoris_.
          EVAN. And hast thou any else?
          GNOTH. I have an older, my lord, for other uses.
          CLEAN. My lord,
        I do observe a strange decorum here:
        These that do lead this day of jollity
        Do march with music and most mirthful cheeks;
        Those that do follow, sad and wofully,
        Nearer the haviour of a funeral
        Than [of] a wedding.
          EVAN. ’Tis true: pray expound that, sir.
          GNOTH. As the destiny of the day falls out, my lord, one
        goes[332] to wedding, another goes to hanging; and your
        grace, in the due consideration, shall find ’em much
        alike; the one hath the ring upon her finger, the other
        the[333] halter about her neck. _I take thee, Beatrice_,
        says the bridegroom; _I take thee, Agatha_, says the
        hangman; and both say together, _to have and to hold,
        till death do part us_.
          EVAN. This is not yet plain enough to my understanding.
          GNOTH. If further your grace examine it, you shall find
        I shew myself a dutiful subject, and obedient to the
        law, myself, with these my good friends, and your good
        subjects, our old wives, whose days are ripe, and their
        lives forfeit to the law: only myself, more forward than
        the rest, am already provided of my second choice.
          EVAN. O, take heed, sir, you’ll run yourself into
           danger!
        If the law finds you with two wives at once,
        There’s a shrewd premunire.
          GNOTH. I have taken leave of the old, my lord. I have
        nothing to say to her; she’s going to sea, your grace
        knows whither, better than I do: she has a strong wind
        with her, it stands full in her poop; when you please,
        let her disembogue.
          COOK. And the rest of her neighbours with her, whom we
        present to the satisfaction of your highness’ law.
          GNOTH. And so we take our leaves, and leave them to your
        highness.—Crowd on.[334]
          EVAN. Stay, stay, you are too forward. Will you marry,
        And your wife yet living?
          GNOTH. Alas! she’ll be dead before we can get to church.
        If your grace would set her in the way, I would despatch
        her: I have a venture on’t, which would return me, if
        your highness would make a little more haste, two for
        one.
          EVAN. Come, my lords, we must sit again; here’s a case
        Craves a most serious censure.
          COOK. Now they shall be despatch’d out of the way.
          GNOTH. I would they were gone once; the time goes away.
          EVAN. Which is the wife unto the forward bridegroom?
          AGA. I am, and[335] it please your grace.
          EVAN. Trust me, a lusty woman, able-bodied,
        And well-blooded cheeks.
          GNOTH. O, she paints, my lord; she was a chambermaid
        once, and learnt it of her lady.
          EVAN. Sure I think she cannot be so old.
          AGA. Truly I think so too, and please your grace.
          GNOTH. Two to one with your grace of that! she’s
        threescore by the book.
          LEON. Peace, sirrah, you’re too loud.
          COOK. Take heed, Gnotho;[336] if you move the duke’s
        patience, ’tis an edge-tool; but a word and a blow; he
        cuts off your head.
          GNOTH. Cut off my head! away, ignorant! he knows it cost
        more in the hair; he does not use to cut off many such
        heads as mine: I will talk to him too; if he cut off my
        head, I’ll give him my ears. I say my wife is at full
        age for the law; the clerk shall take his oath, and the
        church-book shall be sworn too.
          EVAN. My lords, I leave this censure to you.
          LEON. Then first, this fellow does deserve punishment,
        For offering up a lusty able woman,
        Which may do service to the commonwealth,
        Where the law craves one impotent and useless.
          CREON. Therefore to be severely punish’d,
        For thus attempting a second marriage,
        His wife yet living.
          LYS. Nay, to have it trebled;
        That even the day and instant when he should mourn,
        As a kind husband, at[337] her funeral,
        He leads a triumph to the scorn of it;
        Which unseasonable joy ought to be punish’d
        With all severity.
          BUT. The fiddles will be in a foul case too, by and
             by.
          LEON. Nay, further; it seems he has a venture
        Of two for one at his second marriage,
        Which cannot be but a conspiracy
        Against the former.
          GNOTH. A mess of wise old men!
          LYS. Sirrah, what can you answer to all these?
          GNOTH. Ye are good old men, and talk as age will give
        you leave. I would speak with the youthful duke himself;
        he and I may speak of things that shall be thirty or
        forty years after you are dead and rotten. Alas! you are
        here to-day, and gone to sea to-morrow.
          EVAN. In troth, sir, then I must be plain with you.
        The law that should take away your old wife from you,
        The which I do perceive was your desire,
        Is void and frustrate; so for the rest:
        There has been since another parliament
        Has cut it off.
          GNOTH. I see your grace is disposed to be pleasant.
          EVAN. Yes, you might perceive that; I had not else
        Thus dallied with your follies.
          GNOTH. I’ll talk further with your grace when I come
        back from church; in the mean time, you know what to do
        with the old women.
          EVAN. Stay, sir, unless in the mean time you mean
        I cause a gibbet to be set up in your way,
        And hang you at your return.
          AGA. O gracious prince!
          EVAN. Your old wives cannot die to-day by any
        Law of mine; for aught I can say to ’em,
        They may, by a new edict, bury you,
        And then, perhaps, you[’ll] pay a new fine too.
          GNOTH. This is fine, indeed!
          AGA. O gracious prince! may he live a hundred years
             more.
          COOK. Your venture is not like to come in today,
        Gnotho.[338]
          GNOTH. Give me the principal back.
          COOK. Nay, by my troth we’ll venture still—and I’m sure
        we have as ill a venture of it as you; for we have taken
        old wives of purpose, that[339] we had thought to have
        put away at this market, and now we cannot utter a
        pennyworth.
          EVAN. Well, sirrah, you were best to discharge your new
        charge, and take your old one to you.
          GNOTH. O music! no music, but prove most doleful
             trumpet;[340]
        O bride! no bride, but thou mayst prove a strumpet;
        O venture! no venture, I have, for one, now none;
        O wife! thy life is sav’d when I hop’d it had[341] been
           gone.
        Case up your fruitless strings; no penny, no wedding;
        Case up thy maidenhead; no priest, no bedding:
        Avaunt, my venture! it can ne’er be restor’d,
        Till Ag, my old wife, be thrown overboard:
        Then come again, old Ag, since it must be so;
        Let bride and venture with woful music go.
          COOK. What for the bridecake, Gnotho?[342]
          GNOTH. Let it be mouldy, now ’tis out of season,
        Let it grow out of date, currant, and reason;
        Let it be chipt and chopt, and given to chickens.
        No more is got by that than William Dickins
        Got by his wooden dishes.
        Put up your plums, as fiddlers put up pipes,
        The wedding dash’d, the bridegroom weeps and wipes.
        Fiddlers, farewell! and now, without perhaps,
        Put up your fiddles as you put up scraps.
          LYS. This passion[343] has given some satisfaction yet.
        My lord, I think you’ll pardon him now, with all the
        rest, so they live honestly with the wives they have.
          EVAN. O, most freely; free pardon to all.
          COOK. Ay, we have deserved our pardons, if we can live
        honestly with such reverend wives, that have no motion
        in ’em but their tongues.
          AGA. Heaven bless your grace! you’re a just prince.
          GNOTH. All hopes[344] dash’d; the clerk’s duties lost,
        [My] venture gone; my second wife divorc’d;
        And which is worst, the old one come back again!
        Such voyages are made now-a-days!
         I will weep two salt [ones out] of my[345] nose,
        besides these two fountains of fresh water. Your grace
        had been more kind to your young subjects—heaven bless
        and mend your laws, that they do not gull your poor
        countrymen: but[346] I am not the first, by forty, that
        has been undone by the law. ’Tis but a folly to stand
        upon terms; I take my leave of your grace, as well as
        mine eyes will give me leave: I would they had been
        asleep in their beds when they opened ’em to see this
        day! Come, Ag; come, Ag.
                                  [_Exeunt_ GNOTHO _and_ AGATHA.
          CREON. Were not you all my servants?
          COOK. During your life, as we thought, sir; but our
        young master turned us away.
          CREON. How headlong, villain, wert thou in thy ruin!
          SIM. I followed the fashion, sir, as other young men
        did. If you were[347] as we thought you had been, we
        should ne’er have come for this, I warrant you. We did
        not feed, after the old fashion, on beef and mutton, and
        such like.
          CREON. Well, what damage or charge you have run
        yourselves into by marriage, I cannot help, nor deliver
        you from your wives; them you must keep; yourselves
        shall again return[348] to me.
          ALL. We thank your lordship for your love, and must
        thank ourselves for our bad bargains.         [_Exeunt._
          EVAN. Cleanthes, you delay the power of law,
        To be inflicted on these misgovern’d men,
        That filial duty have so far transgress’d.
          CLEAN. My lord, I see a satisfaction
        Meeting the sentence, even preventing it,
        Beating my words back in their utterance.
        See, sir, there’s salt sorrow bringing forth fresh
        And new duties, as the sea propagates.
        The elephants have found their joints too——
                                                  [_They kneel._
         Why, here’s humility able to bind up
        The punishing hand[s] of the severest masters,
        Much more the gentle fathers’.
          SIM. I had ne’er thought to have been brought so low as
        my knees again; but since there’s no remedy, fathers,
        reverend fathers, as you ever hope to have good sons and
        heirs, a handful of pity! we confess we have deserved
        more than we are willing to receive at your hands,
        though sons can never deserve too much of their fathers,
        as shall appear afterwards.
          CREON. And what way can you decline your feeding now?
        You cannot retire to beeves and muttons, sure.
          SIM. Alas! sir, you see a good pattern for that, now we
        have laid by our high and lusty meats, and are down to
        our marrow-bones already.
          CREON. Well, sir, rise to virtues: we’ll bind[349] you
             now;
        You that were too weak yourselves to govern,
        By others shall be govern’d.
          LYS. Cleanthes,
        I meet your justice with reconcilement:
        If there be tears of faith in woman’s breast,
        I have receiv’d a myriad, which confirms me
        To find a happy renovation.
          CLEAN. Here’s virtue’s throne,
        Which I’ll embellish with my dearest jewels
        Of love and faith, peace and affection!
        This is the altar of my sacrifice,
        Where daily my devoted knees shall bend.
        Age-honour’d shrine! time still so love you,
        That I so long may have you in mine eye
        Until my memory lose your beginning!
        For you, great prince, long may your fame survive,
        Your justice and your wisdom never die,
        Crown of your crown, the blessing of your land,
        Which you reach to her from your regent[350] hand!
          LEON. O Cleanthes, had you with us tasted
        The entertainment of our retirement,
        Fear’d and exclaim’d on in your ignorance,
        You might have sooner died upon the wonder,
        Than any rage or passion for our loss.
        A place at hand we were all strangers in,
        So spher’d about with music, such delights,
        [Such] viands and attendance, and once a day
        So cheered with a royal visitant,
        That ofttimes, waking, our unsteady phantasies
        Would question whether we yet liv’d or no,
        Or had possession of that paradise
        Where angels be the guard!
          EVAN. Enough, Leonides,
        You go beyond the praise; we have our end,
        And all is ended well: we have now seen
        The flowers and weeds that grow[351] about our court.
          SIM. If these be weeds, I’m afraid I shall wear none so
        good again as long as my father lives.

          EVAN. Only this gentleman we did abuse
        With our own bosom: we seem’d a tyrant,
        And he our instrument. Look, ’tis Cratilus,
                                          [_Discovers_ CRATILUS.
         The man that you suppos’d had now been travell’d;
        Which we gave leave to learn to speak,
        And bring us foreign languages to Greece.
        All’s joy,[352] I see; let music be the crown:
        And set it high, “The good needs fear no law,
        It is his safety, and the bad man’s awe.”
                                            [_Flourish. Exeunt._

                             --------------

  The notes on this play have enabled the reader to see
  distinctly the difference between the present and the original
  text: and now, at its close, I cannot help remarking, that,
  out of respect for Gifford’s judgment, I have perhaps deviated
  oftener from the old copy than I should have done if the play
  had not been previously edited by him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                  THE
                         MAYOR OF QUEENBOROUGH.




              _The Mayor of Quinborough: A Comedy. As it hath been often
              Acted with much Applause at Black-Fryars, By His Majesties
              Servants. Written by Tho. Middleton. London, Printed for
              Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
              of the Blew-Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New-Exchange._
              1661. 4to.

              From the introduction of an individual as a chorus, and of
              dumb shows (such as we find in _Pericles_, and other dramas
              of an early date), we may gather that this piece was among
              the author’s first attempts at dramatic composition. Nor does
              the mention made in it of a play called the _Wild-Goose
              Chase_, even supposing that Fletcher’s comedy be meant,
              overthrow such a conclusion. The passage where that mention
              occurs (Act v. Sc. i.) might have been inserted when the
              _Mayor of Queenborough_ was revived, at a period long after
              its first appearance on the stage: (every reader of our old
              dramas is aware that play-wrights were often employed to make
              “additions” to the works of their predecessors): it might,
              indeed, have been written by Middleton himself, after the
              appearance of Fletcher’s play, which was produced about 1621.

              When Henslowe in his diary notices “Oct. 1602. Randall, Earl
              of Chester, by T. Middleton,” Malone thinks (why, I know
              not,) that the _Mayor of Queenborough_ is meant.

              This drama has been reprinted in the different editions of
              Dodsley’s _Coll. of Old Plays_, vol. xi.

              “The author,” says Langbaine, “has chiefly followed
              Rainulph’s _Polychronicon_: see besides Stowe, Speed, Du
              Chesne, &c. in the reign of Vortiger.”—_Account of Dram.
              Poets_, p. 372.


                    GENTLEMEN,[353]

              You have the first flight of him, I assure you. This _Mayor
              of Queenborough_, whom you have all heard of, and some of you
              beheld upon the stage, now begins to walk abroad in print: he
              has been known sufficiently by the reputation of his wit,
              which is enough, by the way, to distinguish him from ordinary
              mayors; but wit, you know, has skulked in corners for many
              years past,[354] and he was thought to have most of it that
              could best hide himself. Now whether this magistrate feared
              the decimating times, or kept up the state of other mayors,
              that are bound not to go out of their liberties during the
              time of their mayoralty, I know not: ’tis enough for me to
              put him into your hands, under the title of an honest man,
              which will appear plainly to you, because you shall find him
              all along to have a great pique to the rebel Oliver. I am
              told his drollery yields to none the English drama did ever
              produce; and though I would not put his modesty to the blush,
              by speaking too much in his commendation, yet I know you will
              agree with me, upon your better acquaintance with him, that
              there is some difference in point of wit betwixt the _Mayor
              of Queenborough_ and the _Mayor of Huntingdon_.[355]


                                    DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

                CONSTANTIUS,        }
                AURELIUS AMBROSIUS, } _sons of_ CONSTANTINE.
                UTHER PENDRAGON,    }
                VORTIGER.
                VORTIMER, _his son_.
                DEVONSHIRE, } _British lords_.
                STAFFORD,   }
                GERMANUS,   } _monks_.
                LUPUS,      }
                HENGIST.
                HORSUS.
                SIMON, _a tanner, Mayor of Queenborough_.
                AMINADAB, _his clerk_.
                OLIVER, _a fustian-weaver_.
                _Glover._
                _Barber._
                _Tailor._
                _Felt-monger._
                _Button-maker._
                _Graziers._
                _Players._
                _Gentlemen._
                _Murderers._
                _Soldiers, Footmen, &c._

                CASTIZA, _daughter to_ DEVONSHIRE.
                ROXENA, _daughter to_ HENGIST.
                _Ladies._

                RAYNULPH HIGDEN, _Monk of Chester, as Chorus_.




                                           THE
                                 MAYOR OF QUEENBOROUGH.


                             --------------




                                 ACT I.

                         _Enter_ RAYNULPH.[356]

          RAY. What Raynulph, monk of Chester, can
        Raise from his Polychronicon,
        That raiseth him, as works do men,
        To see long-parted light agen,[357]
        That best may please this round fair ring,
        With sparkling diamonds circled in,
        I shall produce. If all my powers
        Can win the grace of two poor hours,
        Well apaid[358] I go to rest.
        Ancient stories have been best;
        Fashions, that are now call’d new,
        Have been worn by more than you;
        Elder times have us’d the same,
        Though these new ones get the name:
        So in story what now told
        That takes not part with days of old?
        Then to approve time’s mutual glory,
        Join new time’s love to old time’s story.      [_Exit._


                                SCENE I.


                       _Before a Monastery._[359]

          _Shouts within; then enter_ VORTIGER, _carrying the
                                crown_.

            VORT. Will that wide-throated beast, the multitude,
        Never leave bellowing? Courtiers are ill
        Advisèd when they first make such monsters.
        How near was I to a sceptre and a crown!
        Fair power was even upon me; my desires
        Were casting glory, till this forkèd rabble,
        With their infectious acclamations,
        Poison’d my fortunes for Constantine’s sons.
        Well, though I rise not king, I’ll seek the means
        To grow as near to one as policy can,
        And choke their expectations.

                   _Enter_ DEVONSHIRE _and_ STAFFORD.

                                    Now, good lords,
        In whose kind loves and wishes I am built
        As high as human dignity can aspire,
        Are yet those trunks, that have no other souls
        But noise and ignorance, something more quiet?
          DEVON. Nor are they like to be, for aught we gather:
        Their wills are up still; nothing can appease them;
        Good speeches are but cast away upon them.
          VORT. Then, since necessity and fate withstand me,
        I’ll strive to enter at a straiter passage.
        Your sudden aid and counsels, good my lords.
          STAFF. They’re[360] ours no longer than they do you
             service.

            _Enter_ CONSTANTIUS _in the habit of a monk,
              attended by_ GERMANUS _and_ LUPUS: _as they are
              going into the monastery_, VORTIGER _stays them_.

          VORT. Vessels of sanctity, be pleas’d a while
        To give attention to the general peace,
        Wherein heaven is serv’d too, though not so purely.
        Constantius, eldest son of Constantine,
        We here seize on thee for the general good,
        And in thy right of birth.
          CONST. On me! for what, lords?
          VORT. The kingdom’s government.
          CONST. O powers of blessedness,
        Keep me from growing downwards into earth again!
        I hope I’m[361] further on my way than so.—
        Set forwards!
          VORT. You must not.
          CONST. How!
          VORT. I know your wisdom
        Will light upon a way to pardon us,
        When you shall read in every Briton’s brow
        The urg’d necessity of the times.
          CONST. What necessity can there be in the world,
        But prayer and repentance? and that business
        I am about now.
          VORT. Hark, afar off still!
        We lose and hazard much.—Holy Germanus
        And reverend Lupus, with all expedition
        Set the crown on him.
          CONST. No such mark of fortune
        Comes near my head.
          VORT. My lord, we’re[362] forc’d to rule you.
          CONST. Dare you receive heaven’s light in at your
             eyelids,
        And offer violence to religion?
        Take heed;
        The very beam let in to comfort you
        May be the fire to burn you. On these knees,
                                                    [_Kneeling._
         Harden’d with zealous prayers, I entreat you
        Bring not my cares into the world again!
        Think with how much unwillingness and anguish
        A glorified soul parted from the body
        Would to that loathsome jail again return:
        With such great pain a well-subdu’d affection
        Re-enters worldly business.
          VORT. Good my lord,
        I know you cannot lodge so many virtues,
        But patience must be one. As low as earth
                     [_Kneeling with_ DEVONSHIRE _and_ STAFFORD.
         We beg the freeness of your own consent,
        Which else must be constrain’d; and time it were
        Either agreed or forc’d. Speak, good my lord,
        For you bind up more sins in this delay
        Than thousand prayers can absolve again.
          CONST. Were’t but my death, you should not kneel so
             long for’t.
          VORT. ’Twill be the death of millions if you rise not,
        And that betimes too.—Lend your help, my lords,
        For fear all come too late.
                             [_They rise and raise_ CONSTANTIUS.
          CONST. This is a cruelty
        That peaceful man did never suffer yet,
        To make me die again, that once was dead,
        And begin all that ended long before.
        Hold, Lupus and Germanus: you are lights
        Of holiness and religion; can you offer
        The thing that is not lawful? stand not I
        Clear from all temporal charge by my profession?
          GER. Not when a time so violent calls upon you.
        Who’s[363] born a prince, is born a general peace,[364]
        Not his own only: heaven will look for him
        In others’ acts,[365] and will requite[366] him there.
        What is in you religious, must be shewn
        In saving many more souls than your own.
          CONST. Did not great Constantine, our noble father,
        Deem me unfit for government and rule,
        And therefore preas’d[367] me into this profession?
        Which I’ve[368] held strict, and love it above glory.
        Nor is there want of me: yourselves can witness,
        Heaven hath provided largely for your peace,
        And bless’d you with the lives of my two brothers:
        Fix your obedience there, leave me a servant.
               [_They put the crown on the head of_ CONSTANTIUS.
          ALL. Long live Constantius, son of Constantine,
        King of Great Britain!
          CONST. I do feel a want
        And extreme poverty of joy within;
        The peace I had is parted ’mongst rude men;
        To keep them quiet, I have lost it all.
        What can the kingdom gain by my undoing?
        That riches is not best, though it be mighty,
        That’s purchas’d by the ruin of another;
        Nor can the peace, so filch’d, e’er[369] thrive with
           them:
        And if’t be worthily held sacrilege
        To rob a temple, ’tis no less offence
        To ravish meditations from the soul,
        The consecrated altar in a man:
        And all their hopes will be beguil’d in me;
        I know no more the way to temporal rule,
        Than he that’s born and has his years come to him
        In a rough desert. Well may the weight kill me;
        And that’s the fairest good I look for from it.
          VORT. Not so, great king: here stoops a faithful
             servant
        Would sooner perish under it with cheerfulness,
        Than your meek soul should feel oppression
        Of ruder cares: such common coarse employments
        Cast upon me your servant, upon Vortiger.
        I see you are not made for noise and pains,
        Clamours of suitors, injuries, and redresses,
        Millions of actions, rising with the sun,
        Like laws still ending, and yet never done,
        Of power to turn a great man to the state
        Of his marble monument with over-watching.
        To be oppress’d is not requir’d of you, my lord,
        But only to be king. The broken sleeps
        Let me take from you, sir; the toils and troubles,
        All that is burthenous in authority,
        Please you lay it on me, and what is glorious
        Receive’t[370] to your own brightness.
          CONST. Worthy Vortiger,
        If ’twere not sin to grieve another’s patience
        With what we cannot tolerate ourself,
        How happy were I in thee and thy love!
        There’s nothing makes man feel his miseries
        But knowledge only: reason, that is plac’d
        For man’s director, is his chief afflictor;
        For though I cannot bear the weight myself,
        I cannot have that barrenness of remorse,[371]
        To see another groan under my burthen.
          VORT. I’m[372] quite blown up a conscionable way:
        There’s even a trick of murdering in some pity.
        The death of all my hopes I see already:
        There was no other likelihood, for religion
        Was never friend of mine yet.                 [_Aside._
          CONST. Holy partners in strictest abstinence,
        Cruel necessity hath forc’d me from you:
        We part, I fear, for ever; but in mind
        I will be always here; here let me stay.
          DEVON. My lord, you know the times.
          CONST. Farewell, blest souls; I fear I shall offend:
        He that draws tears from you takes your best friend.
             [_Exeunt_ CONSTANTIUS, DEVONSHIRE, _and_ STAFFORD;
                _while_ LUPUS _and_ GERMANUS _enter the
                monastery_.
          VORT. Can the great motion of ambition stand,
        Like wheels false wrought by an unskilful hand?
        Then, Time, stand thou too: let no hopes arrive
        At their sweet wishfulness, till mine set forwards.
        Would I could stay thy[373] existence, as I can
        Thy glassy counterfeit in hours of sand!
        I’d keep thee turn’d down, till my wishes rose;
        Then we’d[374] both rise together.
        What several inclinations are in nature!
        How much is he disquieted, and wears royalty
        Disdainfully upon him, like a curse!
        Calls a fair crown the weight of his afflictions!
        When here’s a soul would sink under the burthen,
        Yet well recover’t.[375] I will use all means
        To vex authority from him, and in all
        Study what most may discontent his blood,
        Making my mask my zeal to the public good:
        Not possible a richer policy
        Can have conception in the thought of man.

                         _Enter two_ GRAZIERS.

          FIRST GRAZ. An honourable life enclose your lordship!
          VORT. Now, what are you?
          SECOND GRAZ. Graziers, if’t like[376] your lordship.
          VORT. So it should seem by your enclosures.
        What’s your affair with me?
          FIRST GRAZ. We are your
        Petitioners, my lord.
          VORT. For what? depart:
        Petitioners to me! you’ve[377] well deserv’d
        My grace and favour. Have you not a ruler
        After your own election? hie you to court;
        Get near and close, be loud and bold enough,
        You cannot choose but speed.                   [_Exit._
          SECOND GRAZ. If that will do’t,
        We have throats wide enough; we’ll put them to’t.
                                                      [_Exeunt._

                               DUMB SHOW.

        FORTUNE _discovered, in her hand a round ball full of
            lots; then enter_[378] HENGIST and HORSUS, _with
            others: they draw lots, and having opened them, all
            depart save_ HENGIST _and_ HORSUS, _who kneel and
            embrace: then enter_ ROXENA, _seeming to take leave
            of_ HENGIST _in great passion,[379] but more
            especially and warily of_ HORSUS, _her lover: she
            departs one way_, HENGIST _and_ HORSUS _another_.

                           _Enter_ RAYNULPH.

          RAY. When Germany was overgrown
        With sons of peace too thickly sown,
        Several guides were chosen then
        By destin’d lots, to lead out men;
        And they whom Fortune here withstands
        Must prove their fates in other lands.
        On these two captains fell the lot;
        But that which must not be forgot,
        Was Roxena’s cunning grief;
        Who from her father, like a thief,
        Hid her best and truest tears,
        Which her lustful lover wears
        In many a stoln and wary kiss,
        Unseen of father. Maids do this,
        Yet highly scorn to be call’d strumpets too:
        But what they lack of’t, I’ll be judg’d by you.
                                                        [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                        _A Hall in the Palace._

         _Enter_ VORTIGER, FELT-MONGER, BUTTON-MAKER, GRAZIERS,
                        _and other petitioners_.

          VORT. This way his majesty comes.
          ALL. Thank your good lordship.
          VORT. When you hear yon door open—
          ALL. Very good, my lord.
          VORT. Be ready with your several suits; put forward.
          GRAZ. That’s a thing every man does naturally, sir,
        That is a suitor, and doth mean to speed.
          VORT. ’Tis well you’re[380] so deep learn’d. Take no
             denials.
          ALL. No, my good lord.
          VORT. Not any, if you love
        The prosperity of your suits: you mar all utterly,
        And overthrow your fruitful hopes for ever,
        If either fifth or sixth, nay, tenth repulse
        Fasten upon your bashfulness.
          ALL. Say you so, my lord?
        We can be troublesome if we list.
          VORT. I know it:
        I felt it but too late in the general sum
        Of your rank brotherhood, which now I thank you for.—
        While this vexation is in play, I’ll study
        For a second; then a third to that; one still
        To vex another, that he shall be glad
        To yield up power; if not, it shall be had.
                                             [_Aside, and exit._
          BUTT. Hark! I protest, my heart was coming upwards:
        I thought the door had open’d.
          GRAZ. Marry, would it had, sir!
          BUTT. I have such a treacherous heart of my own, ’twill
        throb at the very fall of a farthingale.
          GRAZ. Not if it fall on the rushes.[381]
          BUTT. Yes, truly; if there be no light in the room, I
        shall throb presently. The first time it took me, my
        wife was in the company: I remember the room was not
        half so light as this; but I’ll be sworn I was a whole
        hour in finding her.
          GRAZ. Byrlady,[382] y’had a long time of throbbing of it
        then.
          BUTT. Still I felt men, but I could feel no women; I
        thought they had been all sunk. I have made a vow for’t,
        I’ll never have meeting, while I live, by candle-light
        again.
          GRAZ. Yes, sir, in lanterns.
          BUTT. Yes, sir, in lanterns; but I’ll never trust candle
        naked again.
          GRAZ. Hark, hark! stand close: it opens now indeed!
          BUTT. O majesty, what art thou! I’d give any man half my
        suit to deliver my petition: it is in the behalf of
        button-makers, and so it seems by my flesh.[383]

             _Enter_ CONSTANTIUS _in regal attire, and two_
                               GENTLEMEN.

          CONST. Pray do not follow me, unless you do it
        To wonder at my garments; there’s no cause
        I give you why you should: ’tis shame enough,
        Methinks, to look upon myself;
        It grieves me that more should. The other weeds
        Became me better, but the lords are pleas’d
        To force me to wear these; I would not else:
        I pray be satisfied; I call’d you not.
        Wonder of madness! can you stand so idle,
        And know that you must die?
          FIRST GENT. We’re[384] all commanded, sir;
        Besides, it is our duties to your grace,
        To give attendance.
          CONST. What a wild thing is this!
        No marvel though you tremble at death’s name,
        When you’ll not see the cause why you are fools.
        For charity’s sake, desist here, I pray you!
        Make not my presence guilty of your sloth:
        Withdraw, young men, and find you honest business.
          SECOND GENT. What hopes have we to rise by following
             him?
        I’ll give him over shortly.
          FIRST GENT. He’s too nice,[385]
        Too holy for young gentlemen to follow
        That have good faces and sweet running fortunes.
                                            [_Exeunt_ GENTLEMEN.
          CONST. Eight hours a-day in serious contemplation
        Is but a bare allowance; no higher food
        To the soul than bread and water to the body;
        And that’s but needful; then more would do better.
          BUTT. Let us all kneel together; ’twill move pity:
        I’ve[386] been at the begging of a hundred suits.
                                   [_All the petitioners kneel._
          CONST. How happy am I in the sight of you!
        Here are religious souls, that lose not time:
        With what devotion do they point at heaven,
        And seem to check me that am too remiss!
        I bring my zeal among you, holy men:
        If I see any kneel, and I sit out,            [_Kneels._
        That hour is not well spent. Methinks, strict souls,
        You have been of some order in your times.
          GRAZ. Graziers and braziers some, and this a felt-maker.
          BUTT. Here’s his petition and mine, if it like[387] your
        grace.                              [_Giving petitions._
          GRAZ. Look upon mine, I am the longest suitor; I was
        undone seven years ago.
          CONST. [_rising with the others_] You’ve[388] mock’d
        My good hopes. Call you these petitions?
        Why, there’s no form of prayer among them all.
                  BUTT. Yes, in the bottom there is[389] half a line
        Prays for your majesty, if you look on mine.
          CONST. Make your requests to heaven, not to me.
          BUTT. ’Las! mine’s a supplication for brass buttons,
        sir.
          FELT. There’s a great enormity in wool; I beseech your
        grace consider it.
          GRAZ. Pastures rise two-pence an acre; what will this
        world come to!
          BUTT. I do beseech your grace——
          GRAZ. Good your grace——
          CONST. O, this is one of my afflictions
        That with the crown enclos’d me! I must bear it.
          GRAZ. Your grace’s answer to my supplication.
          BUTT. Mine, my lord.
          CONST. No violent storm lasts ever;
        That is the comfort of’t.[390]
          FELT. Your highness’s answer.
          GRAZ. We are almost all undone, the country beggar’d.
          BUTT. See, see, he points at heaven, as who should say
        There’s enough there: but ’tis a great way thither.
         There’s no good to be done, I see that already; we may
        all spend our mouths like a company of hounds in chase
        of a royal deer, and then go home and fall to cold
        mutton-bones, when we have done.
          GRAZ. My wife will hang me, that’s my currish destiny.
                               [_Exeunt all except_ CONSTANTIUS.
          CONST. Thanks, heaven! ’tis o’er now: we should
             ne’er[391] know rightly
        The sweetness of a calm, but for a storm.
        Here’s a wish’d hour for contemplation now;
        All’s still and silent; here is a true kingdom.

                          _Re-enter_ VORTIGER.

          VORT. My lord.
          CONST. Again?
          VORT. Alas, this is but early
        And gentle to the troops of businesses
        That flock about authority! you must forthwith
        Settle your mind to marry.
          CONST. How! to marry?
          VORT. And suddenly, there’s no pause to be given;
        The people’s wills are violent, and covetous
        Of a succession from your loins.
          CONST. From me
        There can come none: a profess’d abstinence
        Hath set a virgin seal upon my blood,
        And alter’d all the course; the heat I have
        Is all enclos’d within a zeal to virtue,
        And that’s not fit for earthly propagation.
        Alas, I shall but forfeit all their hopes!
        I’m a man made without desires, tell them.
          VORT. I prov’d them with such words, but all were
             fruitless.
        A virgin of the highest subject’s blood
        They have pick’d out for your embrace, and send her,
        Bless’d with their general wishes, into fruitfulness.
        Lo! where she comes, my lord.

                            _Enter_ CASTIZA.

          CONST. I never felt
        Th’ unhappy hand of misery till this touch:
        A patience I could find for all but this.
          CAST. My lord, your vow’d love ventures me but
             dangerously.
          VORT. ’Tis but to strengthen a vexation politic.
          CAST.[392] That’s an uncharitable practice, trust me,
             sir,
          VORT. No more of that.
          CAST. But say he should affect me, sir,
        How should I ’scape him then? I have but one
        Faith, my lord, and that you have already;
        Our late contràct is a divine witness to’t.
          VORT. I am not void of shifting-rooms and helps
        For all projècts that I commit with you.       [_Exit._
          CAST. This is an ungodly way to come to honour;
        I do not like it: I love lord Vortiger,
        But not these practices; they’re too uncharitable.
                                                       [_Aside._
          CONST. Are you a virgin?
          CAST. Never yet, my lord,
        Known to the will of man.
          CONST. O blessèd creature!
        And does too much felicity make you surfeit?
        Are you in soul assur’d there is a state
        Prepar’d for you, for you, a glorious one,
        In midst of heaven, now in the state you stand in,
        And had you rather, after much known misery,
        Cares and hard labours, mingled with a curse,
        Throng but to the door, and hardly get a place there?
        Think, hath the world a folly like this madness?
        Keep still that holy and immaculate fire,
        You chaste lamp[393] of eternity! ’tis a treasure
        Too precious for death’s moment to partake,
        This twinkling of short life. Disdain as much
        To let mortality know you, as stars
        To kiss the pavements; you’ve a substance as
        Excellent as theirs, holding your pureness:
        They look upon corruption, as you do,
        But are stars still; be you a virgin too.
          CAST. I’ll never marry. What though my truth be
             engag’d
        To Vortiger? forsaking all the world
        I save it well, and do my faith no wrong.     [_Aside._
        You’ve mightily prevail’d, great virtuous sir;
        I’m[394] bound eternally to praise your goodness:
        My thoughts henceforth shall be as pure from man,
        As ever made a virgin’s name immortal.
          CONST. I will do that for joy, I never did,
        Nor ever will again.

         _As he kisses her, re-enter_ VORTIGER _and_ GENTLEMEN.

          FIRST GENT. My lord, he’s taken.
          VORT. I’m[395] sorry for’t, I like not that so well;
        They’re something too familiar for their time, methinks.
        This way of kissing is no way to vex him:
        Why I, that have a weaker faith and patience,
        Could endure more than that, coming from a woman.
        Despatch, and bring his answer speedily.       [_Exit._
          FIRST GENT. My lord, my gracious lord!
          CONST. Beshrew thy heart!
          SECOND GENT. They all attend your grace.
          CONST. I would not have them:
        ’Twould please me better, if they’d[396] all depart,
        And leave me to myself; or put me out,
        And take it to themselves.
          FIRST GENT. The noon is past;
        Meat’s on the table.
          CONST. Meat! away, get from me;
        Thy memory is diseas’d; what saint’s eve’s this?
          FIRST GENT. Saint Agatha’s, I take it.
          CONST. Is it so?
        I am not worthy to be serv’d before her;
        And so return, I pray.
          SECOND GENT. He’ll starve the guard, if this be
        suffered: if we set court bellies by a monastery clock,
        he that breaks a fellow’s pate now, will not be able to
        crack a louse within this twelvemonth.
                                 [_Aside, and exeunt_ GENTLEMEN.
          CONST. ’Tis sure forgetfulness, and not man’s will,
        That leads him forth into licentious ways;
        He cannot certainly commit such errors,
        And think upon them truly as they’re[397] acting.
        Why’s abstinence ordain’d, but for such seasons?

                          _Re-enter_ VORTIGER.

          VORT. My lord, you’ve pleas’d to put us to much pains,
        But we confess ’tis portion of our duty.
        Will your grace please to walk? dinner stays for you.
          CONST. I’ve[398] answer’d that already.
          VORT. But, my lord,
        We must not so yield to you: pardon me,
        ’Tis for the general good; you must be rul’d, sir;
        Your health and life are[399] dearer to us now:
        Think where you are, at court; this is no monastery.
          CONST. But, sir, my conscience keeps still where it
             was:
        I may not eat this day.
          VORT. We’ve[400] sworn you shall,
        And plentifully too: we must preserve you, sir,
        Though you be wilful; ’tis no slight condition
        To be a king.
          CONST. Would I were less than man!
          VORT. You will[401] make the people rise, my lord,
        In great despair of your continuance,
        If you neglect the means that must sustain you.
          CONST. I never eat on eves.
          VORT. But now you must;
        It concerns others’ healths that you take food:
        I’ve[402] chang’d your life, you well may change your
           mood.
          CONST. This is beyond all cruelty.
          VORT. ’Tis our care, my lord.              [_Exeunt._




                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                        _A Room in the Palace._

                    _Enter_ VORTIGER _and_ CASTIZA.

          CAST. My lord, I am resolv’d; tempt me no farther;
        ’Tis all to fruitless purpose.
          VORT. Are you well?
          CAST. Never so perfect in the truth of health
        As at this instant.
          VORT. Then I doubt my own,
        Or that I am not waking.
          CAST. Would you were then!
        You’d[403] praise my resolution.
          VORT. This is wondrous!
        Are you not mine by contract?
          CAST. ’Tis most true, my lord,
        And I am better bless’d in’t than I look’d for,
        In that I am confin’d in faith so strictly:
        I’m[404] bound, my lord, to marry none but you,—
        You’ll grant me that,—and you I’ll never marry.
          VORT. It draws me into violence and hazard:
        I saw you kiss the king.
          CAST. I grant you so, sir;
        Where could I take my leave of the world better?
        I wrong’d not you in that; you will acknowledge
        A king is the best part of’t.[405]
          VORT. O, my passion!
          CAST. I see you something yielding to infirmity, sir;
        I take my leave.
          VORT. Why, ’tis not possible!
          CAST. The fault is in your faith; time I were gone
        To give it better strengthening.
          VORT. Hark you, lady.——
          CAST. Send your intent to the next monastery;
        There you shall find my answer ever after;
        And so with my last duty to your lordship,
        For whose prosperity I will pray as heartily
        As for my own.                                 [_Exit._
          VORT. How am I serv’d in this?
        I offer a vexation to the king;
        He sends it home into my blood with ’vantage.
        I’ll put off time no longer: I have brought him
        Into most men’s neglects, calling his zeal
        A deep pride hallow’d over, love of ease
        More than devotion or the public benefit;
        Which catcheth many men’s beliefs. I’m strong[406] too
        In people’s wishes; their affections point at me.
        I lose much time and glory; that redeem’d,
        She that now flies returns with joy and wonder:
        Greatness and woman’s wish ne’er keep asunder.
                                                        [_Exit._

                               DUMB SHOW.

          [_Enter two villains; to them_ VORTIGER, _who seems to
              solicit them with gold, then swears them, and
              exit. Enter_ CONSTANTIUS _meditating; they rudely
              strike down his book, and draw their swords; he
              kneels and spreads his arms; they kill him, and
              hurry off the body. Enter_ VORTIGER, DEVONSHIRE,
              _and_ STAFFORD, _in conference; to them the two
              villains presenting the head of_ CONSTANTIUS;
              VORTIGER _seems sorrowful, and in rage stabs them
              both. Then the lords crown_ VORTIGER, _and fetch
              in_ CASTIZA, _who comes unwillingly_; VORTIGER
              _hales her, and they crown her_: AURELIUS _and_
              UTHER, _brothers of_ CONSTANTIUS, _seeing him
              crowned, draw their swords and fly_.

                           _Enter_ RAYNULPH.

          RAY. When nothing could prevail to tire
        The good king’s patience, they did hire
        Two wicked rogues to take his life;
        In whom a while there fell a strife
        Of pity and fury; but the gold
        Made pity faint, and fury bold.
        Then to Vortiger they bring
        The head of that religious king;
        Who feigning grief, to clear his guilt,
        Makes the slaughterers’ blood be spilt.
        Then crown they him, and force the maid,
        That vow’d a virgin-life, to wed;
        Such a strength great power extends,
        It conquers fathers, kindred, friends;
        And since fate’s pleas’d to change her life,
        She proves as holy in a wife.
        More to tell, were to betray
        What deeds in their own tongues must say:
        Only this, the good king dead,
        The brothers poor in safety fled.              [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                        _A Hall in the Palace._

         _Enter_ VORTIGER _crowned, a_ GENTLEMAN _meeting him_.

          GENT. My lord!
          VORT. I fear thy news will fetch a curse, it comes
        With such a violence.
          GENT. The people are up
        In arms against you.
          VORT. O this dream of glory!
        Sweet power, before I can have time to taste thee,
        Must I for ever lose thee?—What’s the imposthume
        That swells them now?
          GENT. The murder of Constantius.
          VORT. Ulcers of realms! they hated him alive,
        Grew weary of the minute of his reign,
        Call’d him an evil of their own electing;
        And is their ignorant zeal so fiery now,
        When all their thanks are cold? the mutable hearts
        That move in their false breasts!—Provide me safety:
                                                [_Noise within._

        Hark! I hear ruin threaten me with a voice
        That imitates thunder.

                       _Enter_ SECOND GENTLEMAN.

          SECOND GENT. Where’s the king?
          VORT. Who takes him?
          SECOND GENT. Send peace to all your royal thoughts, my
             lord:
        A fleet of valiant Saxons newly landed
        Offer the truth of all their service to you.
          VORT. Saxons! my wishes: let them have free entrance,
        And plenteous welcomes from all hearts that love us;
                                       [_Exit_ SECOND GENTLEMAN.
         They never could come happier.

          _Re-enter_ SECOND GENTLEMAN _with_ HENGIST, HORSUS,
                            _and Soldiers_.

          HENG. Health, power, and victory to Vortiger!
          VORT. There can be no more pleasure to a king,
        If all the languages earth spake were ransack’d.
        Your names I know not; but so much good fortune
        And warranted worth lightens your fair aspècts,[407]
        I cannot but in arms of love enfold you.
          HENG. The mistress of our birth’s hope, fruitful
             Germany,
        Calls me Hengistus, and this captain Horsus;
        A man low-built, but yet in deeds of arms
        Flame is not swifter. We are all, my lord,
        The sons of Fortune; she has sent us forth
        To thrive by the red sweat of our own merits;
        And since, after the rage of many a tempest,
        Our fates have cast us upon Britain’s bounds,
        We offer you the first-fruits of our wounds.
          VORT. Which we shall dearly prize: the mean’st blood
             spent
        Shall at wealth’s fountain make its own content.
          HENG. You double vigour in us then, my lord:
        Pay is the soul of such as thrive by the sword.
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                           _Near the Palace._

         _Enter_ VORTIGER _and_ GENTLEMEN. _Alarm and noise of
                          skirmishes within._

          FIRST GENT. My lord, these Saxons bring a fortune with
           them
        Stay[s][408] any Roman success.
          VORT. On, speak, forwards!
        I will not take one minute from thy tidings.
          FIRST GENT. The main supporters of this insurrection
        They’ve[409] taken prisoners, and the rest so tame[d],
        They stoop to the least grace that flows from mercy.
          VORT. Never came power guided by better stars
        Than these men’s fortitudes: yet they’re misbelievers,
        Which to my reason is wondrous.

        _Enter_ HENGIST, HORSUS, _and Soldiers, with Prisoners_.

        You’ve given me such a first taste of your worth,
        ’Twill never from my love; when life is gone,
        The memory sure will follow, my soul still
        Participating immortality with it.
        But here’s the misery of earth’s limited glory,
        There’s not a way reveal’d to any honour
        Above the fame[410] which your own merits give you.
          HENG. Indeed, my lord, we hold, when all’s summ’d up
        That can be made for worth to be express’d,
        The fame that a man wins himself is best;
        That he may call his own. Honours put to him
        Make him no more a man than his clothes do,
        And are as soon ta’en off; for in the warmth
        The heat comes from the body, not the weeds:
        So man’s true fame must strike from his own deeds.
        And since by this event which fortune speaks us,
        This land appears the fair predestin’d soil
        Ordain’d for our good hap, we crave, my lord,
        A little earth to thrive on, what you please,
        Where we’ll but keep a nursery of good spirits
        To fight for you and yours.
          VORT. Sir, for our treasure,
        ’Tis open to your merits, as our love;
        But for ye’re strangers in religion chiefly—
        Which is the greatest alienation can be,
        And breeds most factions in the bloods of men—
        I must not yield to that.

                      _Enter_ SIMON _with a hide_.

          HENG. ’S precious, my lord,
        I see a pattern; be it but so little
        As yon poor hide will compass.
          VORT. How, the hide!
          HENG. Rather than nothing, sir.
          VORT. Since you’re so reasonable,
        Take so much in the best part of our kingdom.
          HENG. We thank your grace.
                              [_Exit_ VORTIGER _with_ GENTLEMEN.
                             Rivers from bubbling springs
        Have rise at first, and great from abject things.
        Stay yonder fellow: he came luckily,
        And he shall fare well for’t, whate’er he be;
        We’ll thank our fortune in rewarding him.
          HOR. Stay, fellow!
          SIM. How, fellow? ’tis more than you know, whether I be
        your fellow or no; I am sure you see me not.
          HENG. Come, what’s the price of your hide?
          SIM. O unreasonable villain! he would buy the house over
        a man’s head. I’ll be sure now to make my bargain
        wisely; they may buy me out of my skin else.
        [_Aside._]—Whose hide would you buy, mine or the
        beast’s? There is little difference in their
        complexions: I think mine is the blacker of the two: you
        shall see for your love, and buy for your money.—A
        pestilence on you all, how have you deceived me! you buy
        an ox-hide! you buy a calf’s gather! They are all hungry
        soldiers, and I took them for honest shoe-makers.
                                                                [_Aside._
          HENG. Hold, fellow; prithee, hold;—right a fool
             worldling
        That kicks at all good fortune;—whose man art thou?
          SIM. I am a servant, yet a masterless man, sir.
          HENG. Prithee, how can that be?
          SIM. Very nimbly, sir; my master is dead, and now I
        serve my mistress; ergo, I am a masterless man: she is
        now a widow, and I am the foreman of her tan-pit.
          HENG. Hold you, and thank your fortune, not your wit.
                                             [_Gives him money._
          SIM. Faith, and I thank your bounty, and not your
        wisdom; you are not troubled with wit neither greatly,
        it seems. Now, by this light, a nest of yellow-hammers!
        What will become of me? if I can keep all these without
        hanging myself, I am happier than a hundred of my
        neighbours. You shall have my skin into the bargain;
        then if I chance to die like a dog, the labour will be
        saved of flaying me: I’ll undertake, sir, you shall have
        all the skins in our parish at this price, men’s and
        women’s.
          HENG. Sirrah, give good ear to me: now take the hide
        And cut it all into the slenderest thongs
        That can bear strength to hold.

         SIM. That were a jest, i’faith: spoil all the leather?
        sin and pity! why, ’twould shoe half your army.
          HENG. Do it, I bid you.
          SIM. What, cut it all in thongs? Hum, this is like the
        vanity of your Roman gallants, that cannot wear good
        suits, but they must have them cut and slashed in
        giggets, that the very crimson taffaties sit blushing at
        their follies. I would I might persuade you from this
        humour of cutting; ’tis but a swaggering condition,[411]
        and nothing profitable: what if it were but well pinked?
        ’twould last longer for a summer suit.
          HENG. What a cross lump of ignorance have I lighted
             on!
        I must be forc’d to beat my drift into him.—
                               [_Aside._
        Look you, to make you wiser than your parents,
        I have so much ground given me as this hide
        Will compass, which, as it [now] is, is nothing.
          SIM. Nothing, quotha?
        Why, ’twill not keep a hog.[412]
          HENG. Now with the ’vantage
        Cut into several pieces, ’twill stretch far,
        And make a liberal circuit.
          SIM. A shame on your crafty hide! is this your cunning?
        I have learnt more knavery now than ever I shall claw
        off while I live. I’ll go purchase land by cow-tails,
        and undo the parish; three good bulls’ pizzles would set
        up a man for ever: this is like a pin a-day to set up a
        haberdasher of small wares.
          HENG. Thus men that mean to thrive, as we, must learn
        Set in a foot at first.
          SIM. A foot do you call it? The devil is in that foot
        that takes up all this leather.
          HENG. Despatch, and cut it carefully with all
        The advantage, sirrah.
          SIM. You could never have lighted upon such a fellow to
        serve your turn, captain. I have such a trick of
        stretching, too! I learned it of a tanner’s man that was
        hanged last sessions at Maidstone: I’ll warrant you,
        I’ll get you a mile and a half more than you’re aware
        of.
          HENG. Pray, serve me so as oft as you will, sir.
          SIM. I am casting about for nine acres to make a garden-
        plot out of one of the buttocks.
          HENG. ’Twill be a good soil for nosegays.
          SIM. ’Twill be a good soil for cabbages, to stuff out
        the guts of your followers there.
          HENG. Go, see it carefully perform’d:    [_Exit_ SIMON
             _with Soldiers_.
        It is the first foundation of our fortunes
        On Britain’s earth, and ought to be embrac’d
        With a respect near link’d to adoration.
        Methinks it sounds to me a fair assurance
        Of large honours and hopes; does it not, captain?
          HOR. How many have begun with less at first,
        That have had emperors from their bodies sprung,
        And left their carcasses as much in monument
        As would erect a college!
          HENG. There’s the fruits
        Of their religious show too; to lie rotting
        Under a million spent in gold and marble.
          HOR. But where shall we make choice of our ground,
             captain?
          HENG. About the fruitful flanks of uberous[413] Kent,
        A fat and olive soil; there we came in.
        O captain, he has given he knows not what!
          HOR. Long may he give so!
          HENG. I tell thee, sirrah, he that begg’d a field
        Of fourscore acres for a garden-plot,
        ’Twas pretty well; but he came short of this.
          HOR. Send over for more Saxons.
          HENG. With all speed, captain.
          HOR. Especially for Roxena.
          HENG. Who, my daughter?
          HOR. That star of Germany, forget not her, sir:
        She is a fair fortunate maid.—
        Fair she is, and fortunate may she be;
        But in maid lost for ever. My desire
        Has been the close confusion of that name.
        A treasure ’tis, able to make more thieves
        Than cabinets set open to entice;
        Which learn them theft that never knew the vice.
                          [_Aside._
          HENG. Come, I’ll despatch with speed.
          HOR. Do, forget none.
          HENG. Marry, pray help my memory.
          HOR. Roxena, you remember?
          HENG. What more, dear sir?
          HOR. I see your memory’s clear, sir.                  [_Shouts
             within._
          HENG. Those shouts leap’d from our army.
          HOR. They were too cheerful
        To voice a bad event.

                          _Enter a_ GENTLEMAN.

          HENG. Now, sir, your news?
          GENT. Roxena the fair—
          HENG. True, she shall be sent for.
          GENT. She’s here, sir.
          HENG. What say’st?
          GENT. She’s come, sir.
          HOR. A new youth
        Begins me o’er again.                          [_Aside._
          GENT. Follow’d you close, sir,
        With such a zeal as daughter never equall’d;
        Expos’d herself to all the merciless dangers
        Set in mankind or fortune; not regarding
        Aught but your sight.
          HENG. Her love is infinite to me.
          HOR. Most charitably censur’d; ’tis her cunning,
        The love of her own lust, which makes a woman
        Gallop down hill as fearless as a drunkard.
        There’s no true loadstone in the world but that;
        It draws them through all storms by sea or shame:
        Life’s loss is thought too small to pay that game.
                        [_Aside._
          GENT. What follows more of her will take you[414]
             strongly.
          HENG. How!
          GENT. Nay, ’tis worth your wonder.
        Her heart, joy-ravish’d with your late success,
        Being the early morning of your fortunes,
        So prosperously new opening at her coming,
        She takes a cup of gold, and, midst the army,
        Teaching her knee a reverend cheerfulness,
        Which well became her, drank a liberal health
        To the king’s joys and yours, the king in presence;
        Who with her sight, but her behaviour chiefly,
        Or chief but one or both, I know not which,—
        But he’s so far ’bove my expression caught,
        ’Twere art enough for one man’s time and portion
        To speak him and miss nothing.
          HENG. This is astonishing!
          HOR. O, this ends bitter now! our close-hid flame
        Will break out of my heart; I cannot keep it.
                                                       [_Aside._
          HENG. Gave you attention, captain? how now, man?
          HOR. A kind of grief ’bout[415] these times of the
             moon still:
        I feel a pain like a convulsion,
        A cramp at heart; I know not what name fits it.
          HENG. Nor never seek one for it, let it go
        Without a name; would all griefs were serv’d so!

           _Flourish. Re-enter_ VORTIGER, _with_ ROXENA _and
                              Attendants_.

          HOR. A love-knot already? arm in arm!        [_Aside._
          VORT. What’s he
        Lays claim to her?
          HENG. In right of father-hood
        I challenge an obedient part.
          VORT. Take it,
        And send [me] back the rest.
          HENG. What means your grace?
          VORT. You’ll keep no more than what belongs to you?
          HENG. That’s all, my lord; it all belongs to me;
        I keep the husband’s interest till he come:
        Yet out of duty and respect to majesty,
        I send her back your servant.
          VORT. My mistress, sir, or nothing.
          HENG. Come again;
        I never thought to hear so ill of thee.
          VORT. How, sir, so ill?
          HENG. So beyond detestable.
        To be an honest vassal is some calling,
        Poor is the worst of that, shame comes not to’t;
        But mistress, that[’s] the only common bait
        Fortune sets at all hours, catching whore with it,
        And plucks them up by clusters. There’s my sword, my
           lord;
                              [_Offering his sword to_ VORTIGER.
         And if your strong desires aim at my blood,
        Which runs too purely there, a nobler way
        Quench it in mine.
          VORT. I ne’er took sword in vain:
        Hengist, we here create thee earl of Kent.
          HOR. O, that will do’t!           [_Aside, and falls._
          VORT. What ails our friend? look to him.
          ROX. O, ’tis his epilepsy; I know it well:
        I help’d him once in Germany; comes it again?
        A virgin’s right hand strok’d upon his heart
        Gives him ease straight; but it must be a pure
           virgin[’s],
        Or else it brings no comfort.
          VORT. What a task
        She puts upon herself, unurgèd purity!
        The truth of this will bring love’s rage into me.
          ROX. O, this would mad a woman! there’s no proof
        In love to indiscretion.[416]
          HOR. Pish! this cures not.
          ROX. Dost think I’ll ever wrong thee?
          HOR. O, most feelingly!
        But I’ll prevent it now, and break thy neck
        With thy own cunning. Thou hast undertaken
        To give me help, to bring in royal credit
        Thy crack’d virginity, but I’ll spoil all:
        I will not stand on purpose, though I could,
        But fall still to disgrace thee.
          ROX. What, you will not?
          HOR. I have no other way to help myself;
        For when thou’rt known to be a whore imposterous,[417]
        I shall be sure to keep thee.
          ROX. O sir, shame me not!
        You’ve had what is most precious; try my faith;
        Undo me not at first in chaste opinion.
          HOR. All this art shall not make me feel my legs.
          ROX. I prithee, do not wilfully confound me.
          HOR. Well, I’m[418] content for this time to recover,
        To save thy credit, and bite in my pain;
        But if thou ever fail’st me, I will fall,
        And thou shalt never get me up again.          [_Rises._
          ROX. Agreed ’twixt you and I, sir.—See, my lord,
        A poor maid’s work! the man may pass for health now
        Among the clearest bloods, and those are nicest.
          VORT. I’ve[419] heard of women brought men on their
             knees,
        But few that e’er restored them.—How now, captain?
          HOR. My lord, methinks I could do things past man,
        I’m so renew’d in vigour; I long most
        For violent exercise to take me down:
        My joy’s so high in blood, I’m above frailty.
          VORT. My lord of Kent.
          HENG. Your love’s unworthy creature.
          VORT. See’st thou this fair chain? think upon the
             means
        To keep it link’d for ever.
          HENG. O my lord,
        ’Tis many degrees sunder’d from my hope!
        Besides, your grace has a young virtuous queen.
          VORT. I say, think on it.
          HOR. If this wind hold, I fall to my old disease.
                       [_Aside._
          VORT. There’s no fault in thee but to come so late;
        All else is excellent: I chide none but fate.
                             [_Exeunt._




                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                        _A Room in the Palace._

                      _Enter_ HORSUS _and_ ROXENA.

          ROX. I’ve[420] no conceit[421] now that you ever lov’d
           me,
        But as lust led you for the time.
          HOR. See, see!
          ROX. Do you pine at my advancement, sir?
          HOR. O barrenness
        Of understanding! what a right love’s[422] this!
        ’Tis you that fall, I that am reprehended:
        What height of honours, eminence of fortune,
        Should ravish me from you?
          ROX. Who can tell that, sir?
        What’s he can judge of a man’s appetite
        Before he sees him eat?
        Who knows the strength of any’s constancy
        That never yet was tempted? We can call
        Nothing our own, if they be deeds to come;
        They’re only ours when they are pass’d and done.
        How blest are you above your apprehension,
        If your desire would lend you so much patience,
        T’ examine the adventurous condition
        Of our affections, which are full of hazard,
        And draw in the time’s goodness to defend us!
        First, this bold course of ours cannot last long,
        Nor ever does in any without shame,
        And that, you know, brings danger; and the greater
        My father is in blood, as he’s[423] well risen,
        The greater will the storm of his rage be
        ’Gainst[424] his blood’s wronging: I have cast[425] for
           this.
        ’Tis not advancement that I love alone;
        ’Tis love of shelter, to keep shame unknown.
          HOR. O, were I sure of thee, as ’tis impossible
        There to be ever sure where there’s no hold,
        Your pregnant hopes should not be long in rising!
          ROX. By what assurance have you held me thus far,
        Which you found firm, despair you not in that.
          HOR. True, that was good security for the time;
        But in a change of state, when you’re advanc’d,
        You women have a French toy in your pride,
        You make your friend come crouching; or perhaps,
        To bow in th’ hams the better, he is put
        To compliment three hours with your chief woman,
        Then perhaps not admitted; no, nor ever,
        That’s the more noble fashion. Forgetfulness
        Is the most pleasing virtue they can have,
        That do spring up from nothing; for by the same
        Forgetting all, they forget whence they came,
        An excellent property of oblivion.
          ROX. I pity all the fortunes of poor women
        In my own unhappiness. When we have given
        All that we have to men, what’s our requital?
        An ill-fac’d jealousy, that resembles much
        The mistrustfulness of an insatiate thief,
        That scarce believes he has all, though he has stripp’d
        The true man[426] naked, and left nothing on him
        But the hard cord that binds him: so are we
        First robb’d, and then left bound by jealousy.
        Take reason’s advice, and you’ll find it impossible
        For you to lose me in this king’s advancement,
        Who’s an usurper here; and as the kingdom,
        So shall he have my love by usurpation;
        The right shall be in thee still. My ascension
        To dignity is but to waft thee higher;
        And all usurpers have the falling-sickness,
        They cannot keep up long.
          HOR. May credulous man
        Put all his confidence in so weak a bottom,
        And make a saving voyage?
          ROX. Nay, as gainful
        As ever man yet made.
          HOR. Go, take thy fortunes,
        Aspire with my consent,
        So thy ambition will be sure to prosper;
        Speak the fair certainties of Britain’s queen
        Home to thy wishes.
          ROX. Speak in hope I may,
        But not in certainty.
          HOR. I say in both:
        Hope, and be sure I’ll soon remove the let[427]
        That stands between thee and[428] glory.
          ROX. Life of love!
        If lost virginity can win such a day,
        I’ll have no daughter but shall learn my way.   [_Exit._
          HOR. ’Twill be good work for him that first instructs
             them:
        May be some son[s] of mine, got by this woman too,
        May match with their own sisters. Peace, ’tis he.

                           _Enter_ VORTIGER.

        Invention, fail me not: ’tis a gallant credit
        To marry one’s whore bravely.                  [_Aside._
          VORT. Have I power
        Of life and death, and cannot command ease
        In my own blood? After I was a king,
        I thought I never should have felt pain more;
        That there had been a ceasing of all passions
        And common stings, which subjects use to feel,
        That were created with a patience fit
        For all extremities. But such as we
        Know not the way to suffer; then to do it,
        How most preposterous ’tis! Tush, riddles, riddles!
        I’ll break through custom. Why should not the mind,
        The nobler part that’s of us, be allow’d
        Change of affections, as our bodies are
        Change of food and raiment? I’ll have it so.
        All fashions appear strange at first production;
        But this would be well followèd.—O, captain!
          HOR. My lord, I grieve for you; I scarce fetch breath,
        But a sigh hangs at the end of it: but this
        Is not the way, if you’d[429] give way to counsel.
          VORT. Set me right then, or I shall heavily curse thee
        For lifting up my understanding to me,
        To shew that I was wrong. Ignorance is safe;
        I then slept happily: if knowledge mend me not,
        Thou hast committed a most cruel sin,
        To wake me into judgment, and then leave me.
          HOR. I will not leave you, sir; that were rudely done.
        First, you’ve a flame too open and too violent,
        Which, like blood-guiltiness in an offender,
        Betrays him when nought else can. Out with’t,[430] sir;
        Or let some cunning coverture be made
        Before your practice[431] enters: ’twill spoil all else.
          VORT. Why, look you, sir; I can be as calm as silence
        All the while music plays. Strike on, sweet friend,
        As mild and merry as the heart of innocence;
        I prithee, take my temper. Has a virgin
        A heat more modest?
          HOR. He does well to ask me;
        I could have told him once. [_Aside._]—Why, here’s a
           government!
        There’s not a sweeter amity in friendship
        Than in this league ’twixt you and health.
          VORT. Then since
        Thou find’st me capable of happiness,
        Instruct me with the practice.
          HOR. What will you say, my lord,
        If I ensnare her in an act[432] of lust?
          VORT.[433] O, there were art to the life! but ’tis
             impossible;
        I prithee, flatter me no farther with it.
        Fie! so much sin as goes to make up that,
        Will ne’er[434] prevail with her. Why, I’ll tell you,
           sir,
        She’s so sin-killing modest, that if only
        To move the question were enough adultery
        To cause a separation, there’s no gallant
        So brassy-impudent durst undertake
        The words that shall belong to’t.
          HOR. Say you so, sir?
        There’s nothing made in the world but has a way to’t;
        Though some be harder than the rest to find,
        Yet one there is, that’s certain; and I think
        I’ve took the course to light on’t.[435]
          VORT. O, I pray for’t!
          HOR. I heard you lately say (from whence, my lord,
        My practice[436] receiv’d life first), that your queen
        Still consecrates her time to contemplation,
        Takes solitary walks.
          VORT. Nay, late and early
        Commands her weak guard from her, which are but
        Women at strongest.
          HOR. I like all this, my lord:
        And now, sir, you shall know what net is us’d
        In many places to catch modest women,
        Such as will never yield by prayers or gifts.
        Now there be some will catch up men as fast;
        But those she-fowlers nothing concern us;
        Their birding is at windows; ours abroad,
        Where ring-doves should be caught, that’s married wives,
        Or chaste maids; what the appetite has a mind to.
          VORT. Make no pause then.
          HOR. The honest gentlewoman,
        When nothing will prevail—I pity her now—
        Poor soul, she’s entic’d forth by her own sex
        To be betray’d to man; who in some garden-house[437]
        Or remote walk, taking his lustful time,
        Binds darkness on her eyelids, surprises her;
        And having a coach ready, turns her in,
        Hurrying her where he list for the sin’s safety,
        Making a rape of honour without words;
        And at the low ebb of his lust, perhaps
        Some three days after, sends her coach’d again
        To the same place; and, which would make most mad,
        She’s robb’d of all, yet knows not where she’s robb’d,
        There’s the dear precious mischief!
          VORT. Is this practis’d?
          HOR. Too much, my lord, to be so little known;
        A springe to catch a maidenhead after sun-set,
        Clip it, and send it home again to the city,
        There ’twill ne’er be perceiv’d.
          VORT. My raptures want expression; I conceit[438]
        Enough to make me fortunate, and thee great.
          HOR. I praise it then, my lord.—I knew ’twould take.
             [Aside.]
                                                        [Exeunt.


                               SCENE II.


                       _Grounds near the Palace._

             _Enter_ CASTIZA _with a book, and two_ LADIES.

          CAST. Methinks, you live strange lives; when I see it
           not,
        It grieves me less; you know how to ease me then:
        If you but knew how well I lov’d your absence,
        You would bestow’t[439] upon me without asking.
          FIRST LADY. Faith, for my part, were it no more for
        ceremony than for love, you should walk long enough
        without my attendance; and so think all my fellows,
        though they say nothing. Books in women’s hands are as
        much against the hair,[440] methinks, as to see men wear
        stomachers, or night-rails.[441]—She that has the green-
        sickness, and should follow her counsel, would die like
        an ass, and go to the worms like a salad; not I: so long
        as such a creature as man is made, she is a fool that
        knows not what he is good for.         [_Exeunt_ LADIES.
          CAST. Though among life’s elections, that of virgin
        I did speak noblest of, yet it has pleas’d the king
        To send me a contented blessedness
        In that of marriage, which I ever doubted.

               _Enter_ VORTIGER _and_ HORSUS _disguised_.

        I see the king’s affection was a true one;
        It lasts and holds out long, that’s no mean virtue
        In a commanding man; though in great fear
        At first I was enforc’d to venture on it.
          VORT. All’s happy, clear, and safe.
          HOR. The rest comes gently on.
          VORT. Be sure you seize on her full sight at first,
        For fear of my discovery.
          HOR. Now, fortune, and I am sped.
                               [_Seizes and blindfolds_ CASTIZA.
          CAST. Treason! treason!
          HOR. Sirrah, how stand you? prevent noise and clamour,
        Or death shall end thy service.
          VORT. A sure cunning.                        [_Aside._
          CAST. O, rescue! rescue!
          HOR. Dead her voice! away, make speed!
          CAST. No help? no succour?
          HOR. Louder yet, extend
        Your voice to the last rack;[442] you shall have leave
           now,
        You’re far from any pity.
          CAST. What’s my sin?
          HOR. Contempt of man; and he’s a noble creature,
        And takes it in ill part to be despis’d.
          CAST. I never despis’d any.
          HOR. No? you hold us
        Unworthy to be lov’d; what call you that?
          CAST. I have a lord disproves you.
          HOR. Pish! your lord?
        You’re bound to love your lord, that’s[443] no thanks to
           you;
        You should love those you are not tied to love,
        That’s the right trial of a woman’s charity.
          CAST. I know not what you are, nor what my fault is:
        If it be life you seek, whate’er you be,
        Use no immodest words, and take it from me;
        You kill me more in talking sinfully
        Than acting cruelly:[444] be so far pitiful,
        To end me without words.
          HOR. Long may you live!
        ’Tis the wish of a good subject: ’tis not life
        That I thirst after; loyalty forbid
        I should commit such treason: you mistake me,
        I’ve[445] no such bloody thought; only your love
        Shall content me.
          CAST. What said you, sir?
          HOR. Thus plainly,
        To strip my words as naked as my purpose,
        I must and will enjoy thee. [_She faints._]—Gone
           already?
        Look to her, bear her up, she goes apace;
        I fear’d this still, and therefore came provided.
        There’s that will fetch life from a dying spark,
        And make it spread a furnace; she’s well straight.
              [_Pours drops from a vial into_ CASTIZA’s _mouth_.
         Pish, let her go; she stands, upon my knowledge,
        Or else she counterfeits; I know the virtue.
          CAST. Never did sorrows in afflicted woman
        Meet with such cruelties, such hard-hearted ways
        Human invention never found before:
        To call back life to live, is but ill taken
        By some departing soul[s]; then to force mine back
        To an eternal act of death in lust,
        What is it but most execrable?
          HOR. So, so:
        But this is from my business. List to me:
        Here you are now far from all hope of friendship,
        Save what you make in me; ’scape me you cannot,
        Send your soul that assurance; that resolv’d on,
        You know not who I am, nor ever shall,
        I need not fear you then; but give consent,
        Then with the faithfulness of a true friend
        I’ll open myself to you, fall your servant,
        As I do now in hope, proud of submission,
        And seal the deed up with eternal secrecy;
        Not death shall pluck’t[446] from me, much less the
           king’s
        Authority or torture.
          VORT. I admire him.                               [_Aside._
          CAST. O sir! whate’er you are, I teach my knee
        Thus to requite you, be content to take       [_Kneels._
        Only my sight, as ransom for my honour,
        And where[447] you have but mock’d my eyes with
           darkness,
        Pluck them quite out; all outward lights of body
        I’ll spare most willingly, but take not from me
        That which must guide me to another world,
        And leave me dark for ever; fast without
        That cursed pleasure, which will make two souls
        Endure a famine everlastingly.
          HOR. This almost moves.                      [_Aside._
          VORT. By this light he’ll be taken!          [_Aside._
          HOR. I’ll wrestle down all pity. [_Aside._]—What! will
             you consent?
          CAST. I’ll never be so guilty.
          HOR. Farewell words then!
        You hear no more of me; but thus I seize you.
          CAST. O, if a power above be reverenc’d by thee,
        I bind thee by that name, by manhood, nobleness,
        And all the charms of honour!
               [VORTIGER _snatches her up, and carries her off_.
          HOR. Ah, ha! here’s one caught
        For an example: never was poor lady
        So mock’d into false terror; with what anguish
        She lies with her own lord! now she could curse
        All into barrenness, and beguile herself by’t.[448]
        Conceit’s[449] a powerful thing, and is indeed
        Plac’d as a palate to taste grief or love,
        And as that relishes, so we approve;
        Hence comes it that our taste is so beguil’d,
        Changing pure blood for some that’s mix’d and soil’d.
                      [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                     _A Chamber in a Castle._[450]

                            _Enter_ HENGIST.

          HEN. A fair and fortunate constellation reign’d
        When we set foot here; for from his first gift
        (Which to a king’s unbounded eyes seem’d nothing),
        The compass of a hide, I have erected
        A strong and spacious castle, yet contain’d myself
        Within my limits, without check or censure.
        Thither, with all th’ observance of a subject,
        The liveliest witness of a grateful mind,
        I purpose to invite him and his queen,
        And feast them nobly.
          BARBER [_speaking without_]. We will enter, sir;
        ’Tis a state business, of a twelve-month long,
        The choosing of a mayor.
          HEN. What noise is that?
          TAILOR [_without_]. Sir, we must speak with the good
             earl of Kent:
        Though we were ne’er[451] brought up to keep a door,
        We are as honest, sir, as some that do.

                          _Enter a_ GENTLEMAN.

          HEN. Now, sir, what’s the occasion of their clamours?
          GENT. Please you, my lord, a company of townsmen
        Are bent, ’gainst[452] all denials and resistance,
        To have speech with your lordship; and that you
        Must end a difference, which none else can do.
          HEN. Why then there’s reason in their violence,
        Which I ne’er look’d for: first let in but one,
        And as we relish him, the rest come on.
                                              [_Exit_ GENTLEMAN.
        ’Tis no safe wisdom in a rising man
        To slight off such as these; nay, rather these
        Are the foundations of a lofty work;
        We cannot build without them, and stand sure.
        He that ascends first[453] to a mountain’s top
        Must begin at the foot.

                         _Re-enter_ GENTLEMAN.

                                Now, sir, who comes?
          GENT. They cannot yet agree, my lord, of that:
        They say ’tis worse now than it was before,
        For where the difference was but between two,
        Upon this coming first they’re all at odds.
        One says, he shall lose his place in the church by’t;
        Another will not do his wife that wrong;
        And by their good wills they would all come first.
        The strife continues in most heat, my lord,
        Between a country barber and a tailor
        Of the same town; and which your lordship names,
        ’Tis yielded by consent that he shall enter.
          HENG. Here’s no sweet coil![454] I’m[455] glad they
             are so reasonable.
        Call in the barber [_Exit_ GENTLEMAN]; if the tale be
           long,
        He’ll cut it short, I trust; that’s all the hope.

                  _Re-enter_ GENTLEMAN _with_ BARBER.

        Now, sir, are you the barber?
          BARB. O, most barbarous! a corrector of enormities in
        hair, my lord; a promoter of upper lips, or what your
        lordship, in the neatness of your discretion, shall
        think fit to call me.
          HENG. Very good, I see you have this without book; but
        what’s your business?
          BARB. Your lordship comes to a very high point indeed:
        the business, sir, lies about the head.
          HENG. That’s work for you.
          BARB. No, my good lord, there is a corporation, a body,
        a kind of body.

          HENG. The barber is out at the body; let in the
             tailor.
                                              [_Exit_ GENTLEMAN.
         This ’tis to reach beyond your own profession;
        When you let go your head, you lose your memory:
        You have no business with the body.
          BARB. Yes, sir, I am a barber-chirurgeon; I have had
        something to do with it in my time, my lord; and I was
        never so out of the body as I have been of late: send me
        good luck, I’ll marry some whore but I’ll get in again.

                  _Re-enter_ GENTLEMAN _with_ TAILOR.

          HENG. Now, sir, a good discovery come from you!
          TAIL. I will rip up the linings to your lordship,
        And shew what stuff ’tis made of: for the body
        Or corporation—
          HENG. There the barber left indeed.
          TAIL. ’Tis piec’d up of two fashions.
          HENG. A patch’d town the whilest.
          TAIL. Nor can we go through stitch, my noble lord,
        The choler is so great in the one party:
        And as in linsey-woolsey wove together,
        One piece makes several suits, so, upright earl,
        Our linsey-woolsey hearts make all this coil.
          HENG. What’s all this now? I’m[456] ne’er the wiser
             yet.—
        Call in the rest.
                          [_Exit_ GENTLEMAN, _and re-enter with_
                              GLOVER _and others_.
                     Now, sirs,—what are you?
          GLOV. Sir-reverence[457] on your lordship, I am a
        glover.
          HENG. What needs that then?
          GLOV. Sometimes I deal in dog’s leather, sir-reverence
        the while.
          HENG. Well, to the purpose, if there be any
             towards.[458]
          GLOV. I were an ass else, saving your lordship’s
             presence.
        We have a body, but our town wants a hand,
        A hand of justice, a worshipful master mayor.
          HENG. This is well handled yet; a man may take some hold
        on it.—You want a mayor?
          GLOV. Right, but there’s two at fisty-cuffs about it;
        Sir, as I may say, at daggers drawing,—
        But that I cannot say, because they have none,—
        And you being earl of Kent, our town does say,
        Your lordship’s voice shall part and end the fray.
          HENG. This is strange work for me. Well, sir, what be
             they?
          GLOV. The one is a tanner.
          HENG. Fie, I shall be too partial,
        I owe too much affection to that trade
        To put it to my voice. What is his name?
          GLOV. Simon.
          HENG. How, Simon too?
          GLOV. Nay, ’tis but Simon one, sir; the very same Simon
        that sold your lordship a hide.
          HENG. What sayest thou?
          GLOV. That’s all his glory, sir: he got his master’s
        widow by it presently, a rich tanner’s wife: she has set
        him up; he was her fore-man a long time in her other
        husband’s days.
          HENG. Now let me perish in my first aspiring,
        If the pretty simplicity of his fortune
        Do not most highly take me: ’tis a presage, methinks,
        Of bright succeeding happiness to mine,
        When my fate’s glow-worm casts forth such a shine.—
        And what are those that do contend with him?
          TAIL. Marry, my noble lord, a fustian-weaver.
          HENG. How! he offer to compare with Simon? he a fit
        match for him!
          BARB. Hark, hark, my lord! here they come both in a
        pelting chafe from the town-house.

                      _Enter_ SIMON _and_ OLIVER.

          SIM. How, before me? I scorn thee,
        Thou wattle-fac’d sing’d pig.
          OLIV. Pig? I defy thee;
        My uncle was a Jew, and scorn’d the motion.[459]
          SIM. I list not brook thy vaunts. Compare with me,
        Thou spindle of concupiscence? ’tis well known
        Thy first wife was a flax-wench.
          OLIV. But such a flax-wench
        Would I might never want at my need,
        Nor any friend of mine: my neighbours knew her.
        Thy wife was but a hempen halter to her.
          SIM. Use better words, I’ll hang thee in my year else,
        Let who will choose thee afterwards.
          GLOV. Peace, for shame;
        Quench your great spirit: do not you see his lordship?
          HENG. What, master Simonides?
          SIM. Simonides? what a fair name hath he made of Simon!
        then he’s an ass that calls me Simon again; I am quite
        out of love with it.
          HENG. Give me thy hand; I love thy fortunes, and like a
        man that thrives.
          SIM. I took a widow, my lord, to be the best piece of
        ground to thrive on; and by my faith, my lord, there’s a
        young Simonides, like a green onion, peeping up already.
          HENG. Thou’st a good lucky hand.
          SIM. I have somewhat, sir.
          HENG. But why to me is this election offer’d? The
        choosing of a mayor goes by most voices.
          SIM. True, sir, but most of our townsmen are so hoarse
        with drinking, there’s not a good voice among them all.
          HENG. Are you content to put it to all these then?
        To whom I liberally resign my interest,
        To prevent censures.
          SIM. I speak first, my lord.
          OLIV. Though I speak last, my lord, I am not least: if
        they will cast away a town-born child, they may; it is
        but dying some forty years before my time.
          HENG. I leave you to your choice a while.
          ALL. Your good lordship.

                              [_Exeunt_ HENGIST _and_ GENTLEMAN.
          SIM. Look you, neighbours, before you be too hasty. Let
        Oliver the fustian-weaver stand as fair as I do, and the
        devil do him good on’t.
          OLIV. I do, thou upstart callymoocher,[460] I do; ’tis
        well known to the parish I have been twice ale-
        conner;[461] thou mushroom, that shot’st up in a night,
        by lying with thy mistress!
          SIM. Faith, thou art such a spiny baldrib,[462] all the
        mistresses in the town will never get thee up.
          OLIV. I scorn to rise by a woman, as thou didst: my wife
        shall rise by me.
          GLOV. I pray leave your communication; we can do nothing
        else.
          OLIV. I gave that barber a fustian-suit, and twice
        redeemed his cittern:[463] he may remember me.
          SIM. I fear no false measure but in that tailor; the
        glover and the button-maker are both cocksure; that
        collier’s eye I like not; now they consult, the matter
        is in brewing: poor Gill, my wife, lies longing for the
        news; ’twill make her a glad mother.
          ALL [_except_ OL.]. A Simon, a Simon!
          SIM. Good people, I thank you all.
          OLIV. Wretch that I am! Tanner, thou hast curried
        favour.
          SIM. I curry! I defy thy fustian fume.
          OLIV. But I will prove a rebel all thy year,
        And raise up the seven deadly sins against thee.
                           [_Exit._
          SIM. The deadly sins will scorn to rise by thee, if they
        have any breeding, as commonly they are well brought up;
        ’tis not for every scab to be acquainted with them: but
        leaving the scab, to you, good neighbours, now I bend my
        speech. First, to say more than a man can say, I hold it
        not fit to be spoken; but to say what a man ought to
        say, there I leave you also. I must confess your loves
        have chosen a weak and unlearned man; that I can neither
        write nor read, you all can witness: yet not altogether
        so unlearned, but I can set my mark to a bond, if I
        would be so simple; an excellent token of government.
        Cheer you then, my hearts, you have done you know not
        what: there’s a full point; there you must all cough and
        hem. [_Here they all cough and hem._] Now touching our
        common adversary the fustian-weaver, who threatens he
        will raise the deadly sins among us, let them come; our
        town is big enough to hold them, we will not so much
        disgrace it; besides, you know a deadly sin will lie in
        a narrow hole: but when they think themselves safest,
        and the web of their iniquity best woven, with the horse
        strength of my justice I will break through the loom of
        their concupiscence, and make the weaver go seek his
        shuttle: here you may cough and hem again, if you’ll do
        me the favour. [_They cough and hem again._] Why, I
        thank you all, and it shall not go unrewarded. Now for
        the deadly sins, pride, sloth, envy, wrath; as for
        covetousness and gluttony, I’ll tell you more when I
        come out of my office; I shall have time to try what
        they are: I will prove them soundly; and if I find
        gluttony and covetousness to be directly sins, I’ll bury
        the one in the bottom of a chest, and the other in the
        end of my garden. But, sirs, for lechery, I’ll tickle
        that home myself, I’ll not leave a whore in the town.
          BARB. Some of your neighbours must seek their wives in
        the country then.
          SIM. Barber, be silent, I will cut thy comb else. To
        conclude, I will learn the villany of all trades; my own
        I know already: if there be any knavery in the baker, I
        will bolt it out; if in the brewer, I will taste him
        throughly,[464] and piss out his iniquity at his own
        suckhole: in a word, I will knock down all enormities
        like a butcher, and send the hide to my fellow-tanners.
          ALL. A Simonides, a true Simonides indeed!

                   _Re-enter_ HENGIST _with_ ROXENA.

          HENG. How now? how goes your choice?
          TAIL. This is he, my lord.
          SIM. To prove I am the man, I am bold to take
        The upper hand of your lordship: I’ll not lose
        An inch of my honour.
          HENG. Hold, sirs: there’s some few crowns
        To mend your feast, because I like your choice.
          BARB. Joy bless you, sir!
        We’ll drink your health with trumpets.
          SIM. I with sack-buts,[465]
        That’s the more solemn drinking for my state;
        No malt this year shall fume into my pate.
                    [_Exeunt all but_ HENGIST _and_ ROXENA.[466]
          HENG. Continue[s] still that favour in his love?
          ROX. Nay, with increase, my lord, the flame grows
             greater;
        Though he has learn’d a better art of late
        To set a screen before it.
          HENG. Speak lower.
                  [_Retires to a seat and reads_: _exit_ ROXENA.

                     _Enter_ VORTIGER _and_ HORSUS.

          HOR. Heard every word, my lord.
          VORT. Plainly?
          HOR. Distinctly.
        The course I took was dangerous, but not failing,
        For I convey’d myself behind the hangings
        Even just before his entrance.
          VORT. ’Twas well ventur’d.
          HOR. I had such a woman’s first and second longing in
             me
        To hear[467] how she would bear her mock’d abuse
        After she was return’d to privacy,
        I could have fasted out an ember-week,
        And never thought of hunger, to have heard her:
        Then came your holy Lupus and Germanus—
          VORT. Two holy confessors.
          HOR. At whose first sight
        I could perceive her fall upon her breast,
        And cruelly afflict herself with sorrow,
        (I never heard a sigh till I heard hers);
        Who, after her confession, pitying her,
        Put her into a way of patience,
        Which now she holds, to keep it hid from you:
        There’s all the pleasure that I took in’t now;
        When I heard that, my pains was well remember’d.
        So, with applying comforts and relief,
        They’ve[468] brought it lower, to an easy grief;
        But yet the taste is not quite gone.
          VORT. Still fortune
        Sits bettering our inventions.
          HOR. Here she comes.

                            _Enter_ CASTIZA.

          CAST. Yonder’s my lord; O, I’ll return again!
        Methinks I should not dare to look on him.
                                             [_Aside, and exit._
          HOR. She’s gone again.
          VORT. It works the kindlier, sir:
        Go now and call her back. [_Exit_ HORSUS.] She winds
           herself
        Into the snare so prettily, ’tis a pleasure
        To set toils for her.

                    _Re-enter_ CASTIZA _and_ HORSUS.

          CAST. He may read my shame
        Now in my blush.                               [_Aside._
          VORT. Come, you’re so link’d to holiness,
        So taken[469] with contemplative desires,
        That the world has you, yet enjoys you not:
        You have been weeping too.
          CAST. Not I, my lord.
          VORT. Trust me, I fear you have: you’re much to blame
        To yield so much to passion[470] without cause.
        Is not some time enough for meditation?
        Must it lay title to your health and beauty,
        And draw them into time’s consumption too?
        ’Tis too exacting for a holy faculty.—
        My lord of Kent!—I prithee, wake him, captain;
        He reads himself asleep, sure.
          HOR. My lord!
          VORT. Nay,
        I’ll take away your book, and bestow’t here.
                                     [_Takes book from_ HENGIST.
          HENG. Your pardon, sir.
          VORT. [_giving book to_ CASTIZA] Lady, you that
             delight in virgins’ stories,
        And all chaste works, here’s excellent reading for you:
        Make of that book as made men do of favours,
        Which they grow sick to part from.—And now, my lord,
        You that have so conceitedly[471] gone beyond me,
        And made so large use of a slender gift,
        Which we ne’er minded,[472] I commend your thrift;
        And that your building may to all ages
        Carry the stamp and impress of your wit,
        It shall be call’d Thong-Castle.[473]
          HENG. How, my lord,
        Thong-Castle! there your grace quits me kindly.
          VORT. ’Tis fit art should be known by its right name;
        You that can spread my gift, I’ll spread your fame.
          HENG. I thank your grace for that.
          VORT. And, lovèd lord,
        So well we do accept your invitation,
        With all speed we’ll set forwards.
          HENG. Your honour loves me.                 [_Exeunt._




                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


                _A Public Way near_ HENGIST’s _Castle_.

      _Enter_ SIMON _and all his brethren, a mace and sword
          before him, meeting_ VORTIGER, CASTIZA, HENGIST,
          ROXENA, HORSUS, _and two_ LADIES.

          SIM. Lo,[474] I, the Mayor of Queenborough by name,
        With all my brethren, saving one that’s lame,
        Are come as fast as fiery mill-horse gallops
        To greet thy grace, thy queen, and her fair trollops.
        For reason of our coming do not look;
        It must be done, I find it i’ the town-book;
        And yet not I myself, I cannot[475] read;
        I keep a clerk to do those jobs for need.
        And now expect a rare conceit before Thong-Castle see
           thee.—
        Reach me the thing to give the king, the other too, I
           prithee.—
        Now here they be, for queen and thee; the gift all steel
           and leather,
        But the conceit of mickle weight, and here they come
           together:
        To shew two loves must join in one, our town presents by
           me
        This gilded scabbard to the queen, this dagger unto
           thee.
                              [_Offers the scabbard and dagger._
          VORT. Forbear your tedious and ridiculous duties;
        I hate them, as I do the riots[476] of your
        Inconstant rabble; I have felt your fits:
        Sheathe up your bounties with your iron wits.     [_Exit
           with his train._
          SIM. Look, sirs, is his back turn’d?
          ALL. It is, it is.
          SIM. Then bless the good earl of Kent, say I!
        I’ll have this dagger turn’d into a pie,
        And eaten up for anger, every bit on’t:
        And when this pie shall be cut up by some rare cunning
           pie-man,
        They shall full lamentably sing, Put up thy dagger,
           Simon.     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


            _A Hall in_ HENGIST’s _Castle: a feast set out_.

        _Enter_ VORTIGER, HENGIST, HORSUS, DEVONSHIRE, STAFFORD,
            CASTIZA, ROXENA, _two_ LADIES, GUARDS, _and_
            ATENDANTS.

          HENG. A welcome, mighty lord, may appear costlier,
        More full of toil and talk, shew and conceit;
        But one more stor’d with thankful love and truth
        I forbid all the sons of men to boast of.
          VORT. Why, here’s[477] a fabric that implies eternity;
        The building plain, but most substantial;
        Methinks it looks as if it mock’d all ruin,
        Saving that master-piece of consummation,
        The end of time, which must consume even ruin,
        And eat that into cinders.
          HENG. There’s no brass
        Would pass your praise, my lord; ’twould last beyond it,
        And shame our durablest metal.
          VORT. Horsus.
          HOR. My lord.
          VORT. This is the time I’ve[478] chosen; here’s a full
             meeting,
        And here will I disgrace her.
          HOR. ’Twill be sharp, my lord.
          VORT. O, ’twill be best.
          HOR. Why, here’s the earl her father.
          VORT. Ay, and the lord her uncle; that’s the height
             of’t;[479]
        Invited both on purpose, to rise sick,
        Full of shame’s surfeit.
          HOR. And that’s shrewd, byrlady:[480]
        It ever sticks close to the ribs of honour,
        Great men are never sound men after it;
        It leaves some ache or other in their names still,
        Which their posterity feels at every weather.
          VORT. Mark but the least presentment of occasion,
        As these times yield enough, and then mark me.
          HOR. My observance is all yours, you know’t, my lord.—
        What careful ways some take to abuse themselves!
        But as there be assurers of men’s goods
        ’Gainst storms or pirates, which give[481] adventurers
           courage,
        So such there must be to make up man’s theft,
        Or there would be no woman-venturer left.
        See, now they find their seats! what a false knot
        Of amity he ties about her arm,
        Which rage must part! In marriage ’tis no wonder,
        Knots knit with kisses oft are broke with thunder.
        Music? then I have done; I always learn       [_Music._
        To give my betters place.
                       [_Aside, while the rest seat themselves._
          VORT. Where’s captain Horsus?
        Sit, sit; we’ll have a health anon to all
        Good services.
          HOR. They are poor in these days;
        They’d rather have the carp[482] than the health.
        He hears me not, and most great men are deaf
        On that side.                                  [_Aside._
          VORT. My lord of Kent, I thank you for this welcome;
        It came unthought of, in the sweetest language
        That ever my soul relish’d.
          HENG. You are pleas’d, my lord,
        To raise my happiness for slight deservings,
        To shew what power’s in princes; not in us
        Aught worthy, ’tis in you that makes us thus.
        I’m[483] chiefly sad, my lord, your queen’s not merry.
          VORT. So honour bless me, he has found the way
        To my grief strangely. Is there no delight——
          CAST. My lord, I wish not any, nor is’t needful;
        I am as I was ever.
          VORT. That’s not so.
          CAST. How? O, my fears!                      [_Aside._
          VORT. When she writ maid, my lord,
        You knew her otherwise.
          DEVON. To speak but truth,
        I never knew her a great friend to mirth,
        Nor taken much with any one delight;
        Though there be many seemly and honourable
        To give content to ladies without taxing.
          VORT. My lord of Kent, this to thy full deserts,
        Which intimates thy higher flow to honour.
                                                    [_Drinking._
          HENG. Which, like a river, shall return in service
        To the great master-fountain.
          VORT. Where’s your lord?
        I miss’d him not till now,—Lady, and yours?
        No marvel then we were so out of the way
        Of all pleasant discourse; they are the keys
        Of human music; sure at their nativities
        Great nature sign’d a general patent to them
        To take up all the mirth in a whole kingdom.
        What’s their employment now?
          FIRST LADY. May it please your grace,
        We never are so far acquainted with them;
        Nothing we know but what they cannot keep;
        That’s even the fashion of them all, my lord.
          VORT. It seems ye’ve great thought in their
             constancies,
        And they in yours, you dare so trust each other.
          SECOND LADY. Hope well we do, my lord; we’ve[484]
             reason for it,
        Because they say brown men are honestest;
        But she’s a fool will swear for any colour.
          VORT. They would for yours.
          SECOND LADY. Truth, ’tis a doubtful question,
        And I’d be loath to put mine to’t, my lord.
          VORT. Faith, dare you swear for yourselves? that’s a
             plain question.
          SECOND LADY. My lord?
          VORT. You cannot deny that with honour;
        And since ’tis urg’d, I’ll put you to’t in troth.
          FIRST LADY. May it please your grace—
          VORT. ’Twould please me very well;
        And here’s a book, mine never goes without one;
                                    [_Taking book from_ CASTIZA.
         She’s an example to you all for purity:
        Come, swear (I’ve[485] sworn you shall) that you ne’er
           knew
        The will of any man besides your husband’s.
          SECOND LADY. I’ll swear, my lord, as far as my
             remembrance—
          VORT. How! your remembrance? that were strange.
          FIRST LADY. Your grace
        Hearing our just excuse, will not say so.
          VORT. Well, what’s your just excuse? you’re ne’er
             without some.
          FIRST LADY. I’m[486] often taken with a sleep, my
             lord,
        The loudest thunder cannot waken me,
        Not if a cannon’s burthen be discharg’d
        Close by my ear; the more may be my wrong;
        There can be no infirmity, my lord,
        More excusable in any woman.
          SECOND LADY. And I’m[487] so troubled with the
             mother[488] too,
        I’ve[489] often call’d in help, I know not whom;
        Three at once have been too weak to keep me down.
          VORT. I perceive there’s no fastening.
             [_Aside._]—Well, fair one, then,
        That ne’er[490] deceives faith’s anchor of her hold,
        Come at all seasons; here, be thou the star
        To guide those erring women, shew the way
        Which I will make them follow. Why dost start,
        Draw back, and look so pale?
          CAST. My lord!
          VORT. Come hither;
        Nothing but take that oath; thou’lt take a thousand;
        A thousand! nay, a million, or as many
        As there be angels registers of oaths.
        Why, look thee, over-fearful chastity,
        (That sinn’st in nothing but in too much niceness,[491])
        I’ll begin first and swear for thee myself:
        I know thee a perfection so unstain’d,
        So sure, so absolute, I will not pant on it,
        But catch time greedily. By all those blessings
        That blow truth into fruitfulness, and those curses
        That with their barren breaths blast perjury,
        Thou art as pure as sanctity’s best shrine
        From all man’s mixture, save what’s lawful, mine!
          CAST. O, heaven forgive him, he has forsworn himself!
                     [_Aside._
          VORT. Come, ’tis but going now my way.
          CAST. That’s bad enough.                     [_Aside._
          VORT. I’ve[492] clear’d all doubts, you see.
          CAST. Good my lord, spare me.
          VORT. How! it grows later than so. For modesty’s sake,
        Make more speed this way.
          CAST. Pardon me, my lord,
        I cannot.
          VORT. What?
          CAST. I dare not.
          VORT. Fail all confidence
        In thy weak kind for ever!
          DEVON. Here’s a storm
        Able to wake[493] all of our name inhumed,
        And raise them from their sleeps of peace and fame,
        To set the honours of their bloods right here,
        Hundred years after: a perpetual motion
        Has their true glory been from seed to seed,
        And cannot be chok’d now with a poor grain
        Of dust and earth. Her uncle and myself,
        Wild in this tempest, as e’er[494] robb’d man’s peace,
        Will undertake, upon life’s deprivation,
        She shall accept this oath.
          VORT. You do but call me then
        Into a world of more despair and horror;
        Yet since so wilfully you stand engag’d
        In high scorn to be touch’d, with expedition
        Perfect your undertakings with your fames;
        Or, by the issues of abus’d belief,
        I’ll take the forfeit of lives, lands, and honours,
        And make one ruin serve our joys and yours.
          CAST. Why, here’s a height of miseries never reach’d
             yet!
        I lose myself and others.
          DEVON. You may see
        How much we lay in balance with your goodness,
        And had we more, it went; for we presume
        You cannot be religious and so vile—
          CAST. As to forswear myself—’Tis truth, great sir,
        The honour of your bed hath been abus’d.
          VORT. O, beyond patience!
          CAST. But give me hearing, sir:
        ’Twas far from my consent; I was surpris’d
        By villains, and so raught.[495]
          VORT. Hear you that, sirs?
        O cunning texture to enclose adultery!
        Mark but what subtle veil her sin puts on;
        Religion brings her to confession first,
        Then steps in art to sanctify that lust.—
        ’Tis likely you could be surpris’d!
          CAST. My lord!
          VORT. I’ll hear no more.—Our guard! seize on those
             lords.
          DEVON. We cannot perish now too fast; make speed
        To swift destruction. He breathes most accurst
        That lives so long to see his name die first.
                 [_Exeunt_ DEVONSHIRE _and_ STAFFORD, _guarded_.
          HOR. Here’s no[496] dear[497] villany!       [_Aside._
          HENG. Let him entreat, sir,
        That falls in saddest grief for this event,
        Which ill begins the fortune of this building.
        My lord!                      [_Takes_ VORTIGER _aside_.
          ROX. What if he should cause me to swear too, captain?
        You know I am as far to seek in honesty[498]
        As the worst here can be; I should be sham’d too.
          HOR. Why, fool, they swear by that we worship not;
        So you may swear your heart out, and ne’er hurt
           yourself.
          ROX. That was well thought on; I’d[499] quite lost
             myself else.
          VORT. You shall prevail in noble suits, my lord,
        But this does shame the speaker.
          HOR. I’ll step in now,
        Though’t[500] shall be to no purpose.—Good my lord,
        Think on your noble and most hopeful issue,
        Lord Vortimer, the prince.
          VORT. A bastard, sir!
        I would his life were in my fury now!
          CAST. That injury stirs my soul to speak the truth
        Of his conception.—Here I take the book, my lord:
        By all the glorify’d rewards of virtue
        And prepar’d punishments for consents in sin,
        A queen’s hard sorrow ne’er supply’d a kingdom
        With issue more legitimate than Vortimer.
          VORT. This takes not out the stain of present shame;
        Continuance crowns desert: she ne’er can go
        For perfect honest that’s not always so.—
        Beshrew thy heart for urging this excuse;
        Thou’st justify’d her somewhat.
          HOR. To small purpose.
          VORT. Among so many women, not one here
        Dare swear a simple chastity! here’s an age
        To propagate virtue in! Since I’ve[501] begun,
        I’ll shame you altogether, and so leave you.—
        My lord of Kent!
          HENG. Your highness?
          VORT. That’s your daughter?
          HENG. Yes, my good lord.
          VORT. Though I’m[502] your guest to-day,
        And should be less austere to you or yours,
        In this case pardon me; I may not spare her.
          HENG. Then her own goodness friend her!—she comes, my
             lord.
          VORT. The tender reputation of a maid
        Makes your honour, or else nothing can:
        The oath you take is not for truth to man,
        But to your own white soul; a mighty task:
        What dare you do in this?
          ROX. My lord, as much
        As chastity can put a woman to;
        I ask no favour. And t’approve the purity
        Of what my habit and my time professeth,
        As likewise to requite all courteous censure,
        Here I take oath I am as free from man
        As truth from falsehood, or sanctity from stain.
          VORT. O thou treasure that ravishes the possessor!
        I know not where to speed so well again;
        I’ll keep thee while I have thee: here’s a fountain
        To spring forth princes and the seeds of kingdoms!
        Away with that infection of black honour,
        And those her leprous pledges!—
        Here will we store succession with true peace;
        And of pure virgins grace the poor increase.
                                       [_Exeunt all but_ HORSUS.
          HOR. Ha, ha!
        He’s well provided now: here struck my fortunes.
        With what an impudent confidence she swore honest,
        Having th’ advantage of the oath! precious whore!
        Methinks I should not hear from fortune next
        Under an earldom now: she cannot spend
        A night so idly, but to make a lord
        With ease, methinks, and play. The earl of Kent
        Is calm and smooth, like a deep dangerous water;
        He has some secret way; I know his blood;
        The grave’s not greedier, nor hell’s lord more proud.
        Something will hap; for this astonishing choice
        Strikes pale the kingdom, at which I rejoice.   [_Exit._

                               DUMB SHOW.

  _Enter_ LUPUS, GERMANUS, DEVONSHIRE, _and_ STAFFORD, _leading_
        VORTIMER, _and crown him_: VORTIGER _comes to them in
        passion; they neglect him. Enter_ ROXENA _in fury,
        expressing discontent; then they lead out_ VORTIMER:
        ROXENA _gives two villains gold to murder him; they
        swear performance, and go with her_: VORTIGER _offers to
        run on his sword_; HORSUS _prevents him, and persuades
        him. The lords bring in_ VORTIMER _dead_: VORTIGER
        _mourns, and submits to them: they swear him, and crown
        him. Then enters_ HENGIST _with Saxons_: VORTIGER
        _draws, threatens expulsion, and then sends a parley;
        which_ HENGIST _seems to grant by laying down his
        weapons: so all depart severally_.

                           _Enter_ RAYNULPH.

          RAY. Of Pagan blood a queen being chose,
        Roxena hight,[503] the Britons rose
        For Vortimer, and crown’d him king;
        But she soon poison’d that sweet spring.
        Then unto rule they did restore
        Vortiger; and him they swore
        Against the Saxons: they (constrain’d)
        Begg’d peace, treaty, and obtain’d.
        And now in numbers equally
        Upon the plain near Salisbury,
        A peaceful meeting they decreen,[504]
        Like men of love, no weapon seen.
        But Hengist, that ambitious lord,
        Full of guile, corrupts his word,
        As the sequel too well proves:—
        On that your eyes; on us your loves.            [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                       _A Plain near Salisbury._

                    _Enter_ HENGIST, _with_ SAXONS.

          HENG. If we let slip this opportuneful hour,
        Take leave of fortune, certainty, or thought
        Of ever fixing: we are loose at root,
        And the least storm may rend us from the bosom
        Of this land’s hopes for ever. But, dear Saxons,
        Fasten we now, and our unshaken firmness
        Will endure after-ages.
          FIRST SAX. We are resolv’d, my lord.
          HENG. Observe you not how Vortiger the king,
        Base in submission, threaten’d our expulsion,
        His arm held up against us? Is’t[505] not time
        To make our best prevention? What should check me?
        He has perfected that great work in our daughter,
        And made her queen: she can ascend no higher.
        Therefore be quick; despatch. Here, every man
        Receive into the service of his vengeance
        An instrument of steel, which will unseen
                   [_Distributing daggers._
        Lurk, like a snake under the innocent shade
        Of a spread summer-leaf: there, fly you on.
        Take heart, the commons love us; those remov’d
        That are the nerves, our greatness stands improv’d.
          FIRST SAX. Give us the word, my lord, and we are
             perfect.
          HENG. That’s true; the word,—I lose myself—_Nemp your
             sexes_:[506]
        It shall be that.
          FIRST SAX. Enough, sir: then we strike.
          HENG. But the king’s mine: take heed you touch him
             not.
          FIRST SAX. We shall not be at leisure; never fear it;
        We shall have work enough of our own, my lord.
          HENG. Calm looks, but stormy souls possess you all!

                 _Enter_ VORTIGER _and_ BRITISH LORDS.

          VORT. We see you keep your words in all points firm.
          HENG. No longer may we boast of so much breath
        As goes to a word’s making, than of care
        In the preserving of it when ’tis made.
          VORT. You’re in a virtuous way, my lord of Kent:
        And since both sides are met, like sons of peace,
        All other arms laid by in signs of favour,
        If our conditions be embrac’d—
          HENG. They are.
          VORT. We’ll use no other but these only here.
          HENG. _Nemp your sexes._
          BRITISH LORDS. Treason! treason!
                         [_The_ SAXONS _stab the_ BRITISH LORDS.
          HENG. Follow it to the heart, my trusty Saxons!
        It is your liberty, your wealth, and honour.—
        Soft, you are mine, my lord.        [_Seizing_ VORTIGER.
          VORT. Take me not basely, when all sense and strength
        Lie[507] bound up in amazement at this treachery.
        What devil hath breath’d this everlasting part
        Of falsehood into thee?
          HENG. Let it suffice
        I have you, and will hold you prisoner,
        As fast as death holds your best props in silence.
        We know the hard conditions of our peace,
        Slavery or diminution; which we hate
        With a joint loathing. May all perish thus,
        That seek to subjugate or lessen us!
          VORT. O, the strange nooks of guile or subtilty,
        When man so cunningly lies hid from man!
        Who could expect such treason from thy breast,
        Such thunder from thy voice? Or tak’st thou pride
        To imitate the fair uncertainty
        Of a bright day, that teems a sudden storm,
        When the world least expects one? but of all,
        I’ll ne’er trust fair sky in a man again:
        There’s the deceitful weather. Will you heap
        More guilt upon you by detaining me,
        Like a cup taken after a sore surfeit,
        Even in contempt of health and heaven together?
        What seek you?
          HENG. Ransom for your liberty,
        As I shall like of, or you ne’er obtain it.
          VORT. Here’s a most headlong dangerous ambition!
        Sow you the seeds of your aspiring hopes
        In blood and treason, and must I pay for them?
          HENG. Have not I rais’d you to this height of pride?
        A work of my own merit, since you enforce it.
          VORT. There’s even the general thanks of all aspirers:
        When they have all a kingdom can impart,
        They write above it still their own desert.
          HENG. I’ve[508] writ mine true, my lord.
          VORT. That’s all their sayings.
        Have not I rais’d thy daughter to a queen?
          HENG. You have the harmony of your pleasure for it;
        You crown your own desires; what’s that to me?
          VORT. And what will crown yours, sir?
          HENG. Faith, things of reason:
        I demand Kent.
          VORT. Why, you’ve the earldom of it.
          HENG. The kingdom of’t, I mean, without control,
        In full possession.
          VORT. This is strange in you.
          HENG. It seems you’re not acquainted with my blood,
        To call this strange.
          VORT. Never was king of Kent,
        But who was general king.
          HENG. I’ll be the first then:
        Every thing has beginning.
          VORT. No less title?
          HENG. Not if you hope for liberty, my lord.
        So dear a happiness would not be wrong’d
        With slighting.
          VORT. Very well: take it; I resign it.
          HENG. Why, I thank your grace.
          VORT. Is your great thirst yet satisfied?
          HENG. Faith, my lord,
        There’s yet behind a pair of teeming sisters,
        Norfolk and Suffolk, and I’ve[509] done with you.
          VORT. You’ve got a dangerous thirst of late, my lord,
        Howe’er you came by’t.[510]
          HENG. It behoves me then,
        For my blood’s health, to seek all means to quench it.
          VORT. Them too?
          HENG. There will nothing be abated, I assure you.
          VORT. You have me at advantage: he whom fate
        Does captivate, must yield to all. Take them.
          HENG. And you your liberty and peace, my lord,
        With our best love and wishes.—Here’s an hour
        Begins us, Saxons, in wealth, fame, and power.
                                            [_Exit with_ SAXONS.
          VORT. Are these the noblest fruits and fair’st
             requitals
        From works of our own raising?
        Methinks,[511] the murder of Constantius
        Speaks to me in the voice of’t,[512] and the wrongs
        Of our late queen, slipt both into one organ.

                            _Enter_ HORSUS.

        Ambition, hell, my own undoing lust,
        And all the brood of plagues, conspire against me:
        I have not a friend left me.
          HOR. My lord, he dies
        That says it, but yourself, were’t that thief-king,
        That has so boldly stoln his honours from you;
        A treason that wrings tears from honest manhood.
          VORT. So rich am I now in thy love and pity,
        I feel no loss at all: but we must part,
        My queen and I to Cambria.
          HOR. My lord, and I not nam’d,
        That have vow’d lasting service to my life’s
        Extremest minute!
          VORT. Is my sick fate blest with so pure a friend?
          HOR. My lord, no space of earth, nor breadth of sea,
        Shall divide me from you.
          VORT. O faithful treasure!
        All my lost happiness is made up in thee.       [_Exit._
          HOR. I’ll follow you through the world, to cuckold
             you;
        That’s my way now. Every one has his toy
        While he lives here: some men delight in building,
        A trick of Babel, which will ne’er be left;
        Some in consuming what was rais’d with toiling;
        Hengist in getting honour, I in spoiling.       [_Exit._




                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                      _A Room in_ SIMON’s _House_.

          _Enter_ SIMON, GLOVER, FELT-MAKER, _and other of his
                  brethren_, AMINADAB, _and Servants_.

          SIM. Is not that rebel Oliver, that traitor to my year,
        ’prehended yet?
          AMIN. Not yet, so please your worship.
          SIM. Not yet, sayest thou? how durst thou say, not yet,
        and see me present? thou malapert, that art good for
        nothing but to write and read! Is his loom seized upon?
          AMIN. Yes, if it like your worship, and sixteen yards of
        fustian.
          SIM. Good: let a yard be saved to mend me between the
        legs, the rest cut in pieces and given to the poor. ’Tis
        heretic fustian, and should be burnt indeed; but being
        worn threadbare, the shame will be as great: how think
        you, neighbours?
          GLOV. Greater, methinks, the longer it is wore;
        Where[513] being once burnt, it can be burnt no more.
          SIM. True, wise and most senseless.—How now, sirrah?

                           _Enter a_ FOOTMAN.

        What’s he approaching here in dusty pumps?
          AMIN. A footman, sir, to the great king of Kent.
          SIM. The king of Kent? shake him by the hand for me.
        Thou’rt welcome, footman: lo, my deputy shakes thee!
        Come when my year is out, I’ll do’t myself.
        If ’twere a dog that came from the king of Kent,
        I keep those officers would shake him, I trow.
        And what’s the news with thee, thou well-stew’d footman?
          FOOT. The king, my master—
          SIM. Ha!
          FOOT. With a few Saxons,
        Intends this night to make merry with you.
          SIM. Merry with me? I should be sorry else, fellow,
        And take it in ill part; so tell Kent’s king.
        Why was I chosen, but that great men should make
        Merry with me? there is a jest indeed!
        Tell him I look’d for’t; and me much he wrongs,
        If he forget Sim that cut out his thongs.
          FOOT. I’ll run with your worship’s answer.
          SIM. Do, I prithee.                  [_Exit_ FOOTMAN.
        That fellow will be roasted against supper;
        He’s half enough already; his brows baste him.
        The king of Kent! the king of Kirsendom[514]
        Shall not be better welcome;
        For you must imagine now, neighbours, this is
        The time when Kent stands out of Kirsendom,
        For he that’s king here now was never kirsen’d.
        This for your more instruction I thought fit,
        That when you’re[515] dead you may teach your children
           wit.—
        Clerk!
          AMIN. At your worship’s elbow.
          SIM. I must turn
        You from the hall to the kitchen to-night.
        Give order that twelve pigs be roasted yellow,
        Nine geese, and some three larks for piddling meat,
        And twenty woodcocks: I’ll bid all my neighbours.
        Give charge the mutton come in all blood-raw,
        That’s[516] infidel’s meat; the king of Kent’s a pagan,
        And must be servèd so. And let those officers
        That seldom or never go to church bring it in,
        ’Twill be the better taken. Run, run.
                                               [_Exit_ AMINADAB.
         Come you hither now.
        Take all my cushions down and thwack them soundly,
        After my feast of millers; for their buttocks
        Have left a peck of flour in them: beat them carefully
        Over a bolting-hutch, there will be enough
        For a pan-pudding, as your dame will handle it.
        Then put fresh water into both the bough-pots,
        And burn a little juniper in the hall-chimney:
                                             [_Exeunt_ SERVANTS.
         Like a beast as I was, I pissed out the fire last
           night,
        and never dreamt of the king’s coming.

                          _Re-enter_ AMINADAB.

        How now, returned so quickly?
          AMIN. Please your worship, here are a certain company of
        players—
          SIM. Ha, players!
          AMIN. Country comedians, interluders, sir, desire your
        worship’s favour and leave to enact in the town-hall.
          SIM. In the town-hall? ’tis ten to one I never grant
        them that. Call them before my worship. [_Exit_
        AMINADAB.]—If my house will not serve their turn, I
        would fain see the proudest he lend them a barn.

                _Re-enter_ AMINADAB _with_ PLAYERS.[517]

        Now, sirs, are you comedians?
          SECOND PLAY. We are, sir; comedians, tragedians, tragi-
        comedians, comi-tragedians, pastorists, humorists,
        clownists, satirists: we have them, sir, from the hug to
        the smile, from the smile to the laugh, from the laugh
        to the handkerchief.
          SIM. You’re very strong in the wrist, methinks. And must
        all these good parts be cast away upon pedlars and
        maltmen, ha?
          FIRST PLAY. For want of better company, if it please
        your worship.
          SIM. What think you of me, my masters? Hum; have you
        audacity enough to play before so high a person as
        myself? Will not my countenance daunt you? for if you
        play before me, I shall often look on you; I give you
        that warning beforehand. Take it not ill, my masters, I
        shall laugh at you, and truly when I am least offended
        with you: it is my humour; but be not you abashed.
          FIRST PLAY. Sir, we have play’d before a lord ere now,
        Though we be country actors.
          SIM. A lord? ha, ha!
        Thou’lt find it a harder thing to please a mayor.
          SECOND PLAY. We have a play wherein we use a horse.
          SIM. Fellows, you use no horse-play in my house;
        My rooms are rubb’d: keep it for hackney-men.
          FIRST PLAY. We’ll not offer it to your worship.
          SIM. Give me a play without a beast, I charge you.
          SECOND PLAY. That’s hard; without a cuckold or a
             drunkard?
          SIM. O, those beasts are often the best men in a parish,
        and must not be kept out. But which is your merriest
        play? that I would hearken after.
          SECOND PLAY. Your worship shall hear their names, and
        take your choice.
          SIM. And that’s plain dealing. Come, begin, sir.
          SECOND PLAY. _The Whirligig_,[518] _The Whibble_, _The
        Carwidgeon_.
          SIM. Hey-day! what names are these?
          SECOND PLAY. New names of late. _The Wild-goose
        Chase._[519]
          SIM. I understand thee now.
          SECOND PLAY. _Gull upon Gull._
          SIM. Why this is somewhat yet.
          FIRST PLAY. _Woodcock of our side._[520]
          SIM. Get thee further off then.
          SECOND PLAY. _The Cheater and the Clown._
          SIM. Is that come up again?
        That was a play when I was ’prentice first.
          SECOND PLAY. Ay, but the Cheater has learn’d more
             tricks of late,
        And gulls the Clown with new additions.
          SIM. Then is your Clown a coxcomb; which is he?
          FIRST PLAY. This is our Clown, sir.
          SIM. Fie, fie, your company must fall upon him and beat
        him: he’s too fair, i’faith, to make the people laugh.
          FIRST PLAY. Not as he may be drest, sir.
          SIM. Faith, dress him how you will, I’ll give him that
        gift, he will never look half scurvily enough. O, the
        clowns[521] that I have seen in my time! The very
        peeping out of one of them would have made a young heir
        laugh, though his father lay a-dying; a man undone in
        law the day before (the saddest case that can be) might
        for his twopence[522] have burst himself with laughing,
        and ended all his miseries. Here was a merry world, my
        masters!
         Some talk of things of state, of puling stuff;
        There’s nothing in a play to[523] a clown,
        If he have the grace to hit on’t;[524] that’s the thing:
        The king shews well, but he sets off the king.
        But not the king of Kent, I mean not so;
        The king is one, I mean, I do not know.
          SECOND PLAY. Your worship speaks with safety, like a
             rich man;
        And for your finding fault, our hopes are greater,
        Neither with him the Clown, nor me the Cheater.
          SIM. Away, then; shift, Clown, to thy motley crupper.
                                              [_Exeunt_ PLAYERS.
         We’ll see them first, the king shall after supper.
          GLOV. I commend your worship’s wisdom in that, master
        mayor.
          SIM. Nay, ’tis a point of justice, if it be well
        examined, not to offer the king worse than I’ll see
        myself. For a play may be dangerous: I have known a
        great man poisoned in a play—
          GLOV. What, have you, master mayor?
          SIM. But to what purpose many times, I know not.
          FELT. Methinks they should [not] destroy one another so.
          SIM. O, no, no! he that’s poisoned is always made privy
        to it; that’s one good order they have among them.—[_A
        shout within._] What joyful throat is that? Aminadab,
        what is the meaning of this cry?
          AMIN. The rebel is taken.
          SIM. Oliver the puritan?
          AMIN. Oliver, puritan, and fustian-weaver altogether.
          SIM. Fates, I thank you for this victorious day!
        Bonfires of pease-straw burn, let the bells ring!
          GLOV. There’s two in mending, and you know they
             cannot.
          SIM. Alas,[525] the tenor’s broken! ring out the
             treble!

               _Enter_ OLIVER, _brought in by_ OFFICERS.

        I’m[526] over-cloy’d with joy.—Welcome, thou rebel!
          OLIV. I scorn thy welcome, I.
          SIM. Art thou yet so stout?
        Wilt thou not stoop for grace? then get thee out.
          OLIV. I was not born to stoop but to my loom;
        That seiz’d upon, my stooping days are done.

        In plain terms, if thou hast any thing to say to me,
        send me away quickly, this is no biding-place; I
        understand there are players in thy house; despatch me,
        I charge thee, in the name of all the brethren.
          SIM. Nay, now, proud rebel, I will make thee stay;
        And, to thy greater torment, see a play.
          OLIV. O devil! I conjure thee by Amsterdam![527]
          SIM. Our word is past;
        Justice may wink a while, but see at last.
                   [_Trumpet sounds to announce the commencement
                        of the play._
         The play begins.[528] Hold, stop him, stop him!
          OLIV. O that profane trumpet! O, O!
          SIM. Set him down there, I charge you, officers.
          OLIV. I’ll stop my ears and hide my eyes.[529]
          SIM. Down with his golls,[530] I charge you.
          OLIV. O tyranny, tyranny! revenge it, tribulation!
        For rebels there are many deaths; but sure the only way
        To execute a puritan, is seeing of a play.
        O, I shall swound![531]
          SIM. Which if thou dost, to spite thee,
        A player’s boy shall bring thee aqua-vitæ.[532]

                _Enter_ FIRST PLAYER _as_ FIRST CHEATER.

          OLIV. O, I’ll not swound at all for’t, though I die.
          SIM. Peace, here’s a rascal! list and edify.
          FIRST PLAY. _I say still he’s an ass that cannot live by
        his wits._
          SIM. What a bold rascal’s this! he calls us all asses at
        first dash: sure none of us live by our wits, unless it
        be Oliver the puritan.
          OLIV. I scorn as much to live by my wits as the proudest
        of you all.
          SIM. Why then you’re an ass for company; so hold your
        prating.

               _Enter_ SECOND PLAYER _as_ SECOND CHEATER.

          FIRST[533] PLAY. _Fellow in arms, welcome! the news,
        the news?_
          SIM. Fellow in arms, quoth he? He may well call him
        fellow in arms; I am sure they’re both out at the
        elbows.
          SECOND PLAY. _Be lively, my heart, be lively; the booty
        is at hand. He’s but a fool of a yeoman’s eldest son;
        he’s balanced on both sides, bully; he’s going to buy
        household-stuff with one pocket, and to pay rent with
        the other._
          FIRST PLAY. _And if this be his last day, my chuck, he
        shall forfeit his lease, quoth the one pocket, and eat
        his meat in wooden platters, quoth the other._
          SIM. Faith, then he’s not so wise as he ought to be, to
        let such tatterdemallions get the upper hand of him.
          FIRST PLAY. _He comes._

                    _Enter_ THIRD PLAYER _as_ CLOWN.

          SECOND PLAY. _Ay, but smally to our comfort, with both
        his hands in his pockets. How is it possible to pick a
        lock, when the key is on the inside of the door?_
          SIM. O neighbours, here’s the part now that carries away
        the play! if the clown miscarry, farewell my hopes for
        ever; the play’s spoiled.
          THIRD PLAY. _They say there is a foolish kind of thing
        called a cheater abroad, that will gull any yeoman’s son
        of his purse, and laugh in his face like an Irishman. I
        would fain meet with some of these creatures: I am in as
        good state to be gulled now as ever I was in my life,
        for I have two purses at this time about me, and I would
        fain be acquainted with that rascal that would take one
        of them now._
          SIM. Faith, thou mayest be acquainted with two or three,
        that will do their good wills, I warrant thee.
          FIRST PLAY. _That way’s too plain, too easy, I’m
             afraid._
          SECOND PLAY. _Come, sir, your most familiar cheats
             take best,
        They shew like natural things and least suspected.
        Give me a round shilling quickly._
          FIRST PLAY. _It will fetch but one of his hands neither,
        if it take._
          SECOND PLAY. _Thou art too covetous: let’s have one
        out first, prithee; there’s time enough to fetch out
        th’ other after. Thou liest, ’tis lawful current
        money._                                          [_They draw._
          FIRST PLAY. _I say ’tis copper in some countries._
          THIRD PLAY. _Here is a fray towards;[534] but I will
        hold my hands, let who will part them._
          SECOND PLAY. _Copper? I defy thee, and now I shall
        disprove thee. Look you, here’s an honest yeoman’s son
        of the country, a man of judgment—_
          THIRD PLAY. _Pray you be covered, sir; I have eggs in my
        cap, and cannot put it off._
          SECOND PLAY. _Will you be tried by him?_
          FIRST PLAY. _I am content, sir._
          SIM. They look rather as if they would be tried next
        sessions.
          FIRST PLAY. _Pray give your judgment of this piece of
             coin, sir._
          THIRD PLAY. _Nay, if it be coin you strive about, let me
        see it; I love money._
          FIRST PLAY. _Look on it well, sir._
                                        [_They pick his pocket._
          SECOND PLAY. _Let him do his worst, sir._
          THIRD PLAY. _You’d both need wear cut[535] clothes,
        you’re so choleric._

          SECOND PLAY. _Nay, rub it, and spare not, sir._
          THIRD PLAY. _Now by this silver, gentlemen, it is good
        money; would I had a hundred of them!_
          SECOND PLAY. _We hope well, sir.—Th’ other pocket, and
        we are made men._
                           [_Exeunt_ FIRST _and_ SECOND PLAYERS.
          SIM. O neighbours, I begin to be sick of this fool, to
        see him thus cozened! I would make his case my own.
          THIRD PLAY. _Still would I meet with these things called
        cheaters._
          SIM. A whoreson coxcomb; they have met with thee. I can
        no longer endure him with patience.
          THIRD PLAY. _O my rent! my whole year’s rent!_
          SIM. A murrain on you! This makes us landlords stay so
        long for our money.
          THIRD PLAY. _The cheaters have been here._
          SIM. A scurvy hobby-horse, that could not leave his
        money with me, having such a charge about him! A pox on
        thee for an ass! thou play a clown! I will commit thee
        for offering it.—Officers, away with him!
          GLOV. What means your worship? why, you’ll spoil the
             play, sir.
          SIM. Before the king of Kent shall be thus serv’d,
        I’ll play the clown myself.—Away with him!
                                 [OFFICERS _seize_ THIRD PLAYER.
          THIRD PLAY. With me? if it please your worship, ’twas my
        part.
          SIM. But ’twas a foolish part as ever thou playedst in
        thy life: I’ll make thee smoke for it; I’ll teach thee
        to understand to play a clown; thou shalt know every man
        is not born to it.—Away with him quickly! He’ll have the
        other pocket picked else; I heard them say it with my
        own ears.

             _Re-enter_ SECOND PLAYER _as_ SECOND CHEATER.

        See, he’s come in another disguise to cheat thee again.
                           [_Exit_ THIRD PLAYER _with_ OFFICERS.
          SECOND PLAY. Pish, whither goes he now?
          SIM. Come on, sir, let us see what your knaveship can do
        at me now: you must not think you have a clown in hand.
        The fool I have committed too, for playing the part.
                 [_Throws off his gown, discovering his doublet
                     with a satin forepart, and a canvass back._
          SECOND PLAY. What’s here to do?
          GLOV. Fie, good sir, come away: will your worship base
        yourself to play a clown?
          SECOND PLAY. I beseech your worship let us have our own
        clown; I know not how to go forwards else.
          SIM. Knave, play out thy part with me, or I’ll lay thee
        by the heels all the days of thy life.—Why, how now, my
        masters, who is that laughed at me? cannot a man of
        worship play the clown a little for his pleasure, but he
        must be laughed at? Do you know who I am? Is the king’s
        deputy of no better account among you? Was I chosen to
        be laughed at?—Where’s my clerk?
          AMIN. Here, if it please your worship.
          SIM. Take a note of all those that laugh at me, that
        when I have done, I may commit them. Let me see who dare
        do it now.—And now to you once again, sir cheater: look
        you, here are my purse-strings; I do defy thee.
          SECOND PLAY. Good sir, tempt me not; my part is so
        written, that I should cheat your worship if you were my
        father.
          SIM. I should have much joy to have such a rascal to my
        son.
          SECOND PLAY. Therefore I beseech your worship pardon me;
        the part has more knavery in it than when your worship
        saw it at first: I assure you you’ll be deceived in it,
        sir; the new additions will take any man’s purse in
        Kent, or Kirsendom.[536]
          SIM. If thou canst take my purse, I’ll give it thee
             freely:
        And do thy worst, I charge thee, as thou’lt answer it.
          SECOND PLAY. I shall offend your worship.
          SIM. Knave, do it quickly.
          SECOND PLAY. Say you so? then there’s for you, and here
        is for me.
          [_Throws meal in his face, takes his purse, and exit._
          SIM. O bless me! neighbours, I am in a fog,
        A cheater’s fog; I can see nobody.
          GLOV. Run, follow him, officers.
          SIM. Away! let him go; he will have all your purses, if
        he come back. A pox on your new additions! they spoil
        all the plays that ever they come in: the old way had no
        such roguery in it. Call you this a merry comedy, when a
        man’s eyes are put out in’t? Brother Honeysuckle——
                                               [_Exit_ AMINADAB.
          FELT. What says your sweet worship?
          SIM. I make you deputy, to rule the town till I can see
        again, which will be within these nine days at farthest.
        Nothing grieves me now, but that I hear Oliver the rebel
        laugh at me. A pox on your puritan face! this will make
        you in love with plays as long as you live; we shall not
        keep you from them now.
          OLIV. In sincerity, I was never better pleased at an
        exercise.[537] Ha, ha, ha!
          SIM. Neighbours, what colour was the dust the rascal
        threw in my face?
          GLOV. ’Twas meal, if it please your worship.
          SIM.. Meal! I am glad of it; I’ll hang the miller for
        selling it.
          GLOV. Nay, ten to one the cheater never bought it; he
        stole it certainly.
          SIM.. Why, then I’ll hang the cheater for stealing it,
        and the miller for being out of the way when he did it.
          FELT. Ay, but your worship was in the fault yourself;
        you bid him do his worst.
          SIM.. His worst? that’s true; but the rascal hath done
        his best; for I know not how a villain could put out a
        man’s eyes better, and leave them in his head, as he has
        done mine.

                          _Re-enter_ AMINADAB.

          AMIN. Where is my master’s worship?
          SIM. How now, Aminadab? I hear thee, though I see thee
        not.
          AMIN. You are sure cozened, sir; they are all professed
        cheaters: they have stolen two silver spoons, and the
        clown took his heels with all celerity. They only take
        the name of country comedians to abuse simple people
        with a printed play or two, which they bought at
        Canterbury for sixpence; and what is worse, they speak
        but what they list of it, and fribble out the rest.
          SIM.. Here’s no abuse[538] to the commonwealth, if a man
        could see to look into it!
         But mark the cunning of these cheating slaves,
        First they make justice blind, then play the knaves.
          HENG. [_without_] Where’s master mayor?
          GLOV. Od’s precious, brother! the king of Kent is newly
        alighted.
          SIM. The king of Kent!
        Where is he? that I should live to this day,
        And yet not live to see to bid him welcome!

                      _Enter_ HENGIST, _attended_.

          HENG. Where is Simonides, our friendly host?
          SIM. Ah, blind as one that had been fox’d[539] a
             seven-night!
          HENG. Why, how now, man?
          SIM. Faith, practising a clown’s part for your grace,
        I have practis’d both my eyes out.
          HENG. What need you practise that?
          SIM. A man is never too old to learn; your grace will
        say so, when you hear the jest of it: the truth is, my
        lord, I meant to have been merry, and now it is my luck
        to weep water and oatmeal; I shall see again at supper,
        I make no doubt of it.
          HENG. This is strange to me, sirs.

                          _Enter a_ GENTLEMAN.

          GENT. Arm, arm, my lord!
          HENG. What’s that?
          GENT. With swiftest speed,
        If ever you’ll behold the queen, your daughter,
        Alive again.
          HENG. Roxena?
          GENT. They are besieg’d:
        Aurelius Ambrose, and his brother Uther,
        With numbers infinite of British forces,
        Beset their castle, and they cannot ’scape
        Without your speedy succour.
          HENG. For her safety
        I’ll forget food and rest; away!
          SIM. I hope your worship will hear the jest ere you go.
          HENG. The jest! torment me not.
          SIM. I’ll follow you to Wales with a dog and a bell, but
        I will tell it you.
          HENG. Unseasonable folly!    [_Exit with_ ATTENDANTS.
          SIM. ’Tis sign of war when great men disagree.
        Look to the rebel well, till I can see;
        And when my sight’s[540] recover’d, I will have
        His eyes pull’d out for a fortnight.
          OLIV. My eyes? hang thee!
        A deadly sin or two shall pluck them out first;
        That is my resolution. Ha, ha, ha!           [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                      _Before a Castle in Wales._

           _Enter_ AURELIUS _and_ UTHER, _and_ LORDS, _with_
                               SOLDIERS.

          UTH. My lord, the castle is so fortified—
          AUR. Let wild-fire ruin it,
        That his destruction may appear to him
        In the figure of heaven’s wrath at the last day,
        That murderer of our brother. Hence, away!
        I’ll send my heart no peace till’t[541] be consum’d.

                 [_Enter above_ VORTIGER _and_ HORSUS.

          UTH. There he appears again—behold, my lord!
          AUR. O that the zealous fire on my soul’s altar,
        To the high birth of virtue consecrated,
        Would fit me with a lightning now to blast him,
        Even as I look upon him!
          UTH. Good my lord,
        Your anger is too noble and too precious
        To waste itself on guilt so foul as his:
        Let ruin work her will.
          VORT. Begirt all round?
          HOR. All, all, my lord; ’tis folly to make doubt
             of’t:[542]
        You question things, that horror long ago
        Resolv’d[543] us on.
          VORT. Give me leave, Horsus, though——
          HOR. Do what you will, sir; question them again;
        I’ll tell them to you.
          VORT. Not so, sir;
        I will not have them told again.
          HOR. It rests then—
          VORT. That’s an ill word put in, when thy heart knows
        There is no rest at all, but torment waking.[544]
          HOR. True; my heart finds it, that sits weeping blood
             now
        For poor Roxena’s safety.—[_Aside._] You’ll confess, my
           lord,
        My love to you has brought me to this danger?
        I could have liv’d, like Hengist king of Kent,
        London, York, Lincoln, and Winchester,
        Under the power of my command, the portion
        Of my most just desert, enjoyèd now
        By pettier deservers.
          VORT. Say you so, sir?
        And you’ll confess, since you began confession,
        (A thing I should have died ere I had thought on),
        You’ve marr’d the fashion of your affection utterly,
        In your own wicked counsel, there you paid me:
        You were bound in conscience to love me after;
        You were bound to’t, as men in honesty,
        That vitiate virgins, to give dowries to them:
        My faith was pure before to a faithful woman.
          HOR. My lord, my counsel—
          VORT. Why, I’ll be judg’d by these
        That knit death in their brows, and hold me now
        Not worth the acception of a flattery;
        Most of whose faces smil’d when I smil’d once.—
        My lords!
          UTH. Reply not, brother.
          VORT. Seeds of scorn,
        I mind you not; I speak to them alone
        Whose force makes yours a power, which else were none.
        Shew me the main food of your hate,
        Which cannot be the murder of Constantius,
        That crawls in your revenges, for your loves
        Were violent long since that.
          FIRST LORD. And had been still,
        If from that pagan wound thou’dst kept thee free;
        But when thou fled’st from heaven, we fled from thee.
          VORT. This was your counsel now.
          HOR. Mine? ’twas the counsel
        Of your own lust and blood; your appetite knows it.
          VORT. May thunder strike me from these walls, my
             lords,
        And leave me many leagues off from your eyes,
        If this be not the man whose Stygian soul
        Breath’d forth that counsel to me, and sole plotter
        Of all those false injurious disgraces,
        That have abus’d the virtuous patience
        Of our religious queen.
          HOR. A devil in madness!
          VORT. Upon whose life I swear there sticks no stain
        But what’s most wrongful: and where[545] now she thinks
        A rape dwells on her honour, only I
        Her ravisher was, and his the policy.
          AUR. Inhuman practice![546]
          VORT. Now you know the truth,
        Will his death serve your fury?
          HOR. My death?
          VORT. Say, will it do it?
          HOR. Say they should say ’twould do’t?
          VORT. Why, then it must.
          HOR. It must?
          VORT. It shall.—
        Speak but the word, it shall be yielded up.
          HOR. Believe him not; he cannot do it.
          VORT. Cannot?
          HOR. ’Tis but a false and base insinuation
        For his own life, and like his late submission.
          VORT. O sting to honour! Alive or dead, thou goest
        For that word’s rudeness only.            [_Stabs him._
          FIRST LORD. See, sin needs
        No other destruction than [what] it breeds
        In its own bosom.
          VORT. Such another brings him.
          HOR. What! has thy vile rage stampt a wound upon me?
        I’ll send one to thy soul shall never heal for’t.
          VORT. How, to my soul?
          HOR. It shall be thy master torment,
        Both for the pain and th’ everlastingness.
          VORT. Ha, ha, ha!
          HOR. Dost laugh? take leave of’t:[547] all eternity
        Shall never see thee do so much again.
        Know, thou’rt a cuckold.
          VORT. What!
          HOR. You change too soon, sir.
        Roxena, whom thou’st rais’d to thy own ruin,
        She was my whore in Germany.
          VORT. Burst me open,
        The violence of whirlwinds!
          HOR. Hear me out first.
        For her embrace, which my flesh yet sits warm in,
        I was thy friend and follower.
          VORT. Deafen me,
        Thou most imperious noise that starts the world!
          HOR. And to serve both our lusts, I practis’d with
             thee
        Against thy virtuous queen.
          VORT. Bane to all comforts!
          HOR. Whose faithful sweetness, too precious for thy
             blood,
        I made thee change for love’s hypocrisy.
          VORT. Insufferable!
          HOR. Only to make
        My way to pleasure fearless, free, and fluent.
          VORT. Hell’s trump is in that throat!
          HOR. It shall sound shriller.
          VORT. I’ll dam it up with death first.
                [_They stab each other._ _Enter_ ROXENA _above_.
          ROX. O for succour!
        Who’s near me? Help me, save me! the flame follows me;
        ’Tis in the figure of young Vortimer, the prince,[548]
        Whose life I took by poison.
          HOR. Hold out, breath,
        And I shall find thee quickly.
          VORT. I will[549] tug
        Thy soul out here.
          HOR. Do, monster!
          ROX. Vortiger!
          VORT. Monster!
          ROX. My lord!
          VORT. Toad! Pagan!
          HOR. Viper! Christian!
          ROX. O hear me, O help me, my love, my lord! ’tis
             here!
        Horsus, look up, if not to succour me,
        To see me yet consum’d. O what is love,
        When life is not regarded!
          VORT. What strength’s left
        I’ll fix upon thy throat.
          HOR. I have some force yet.
                        [_They stab each other_, HORSUS _falls_.
          ROX. No way to ’scape? is this the end of glory?
        Doubly beset with enemies’ wrath, and fire?
        It comes nearer—rivers and fountains, fall!—
        It sucks away my breath; I cannot give
        A curse to sin, and hear’t out while I live.
        Help, help!                                   [_Falls._
          VORT. Burn, burn! Now I can tend thee.
        Take time with her in torment, call her life
        Afar off to thee, dry up her strumpet-blood,
        And hardly parch the skin; let one heat strangle her,
        Another fetch her to her sense again,
        And the worst pain be only her reviving;
        Follow her eternally! O mystical harlot,
        Thou hast thy full due! Whom lust crown’d queen before,
        Flames crown her now a most triumphant whore;
        And that end crowns them all!                 [_Falls._
          AUR. Our peace is full
        In yon usurper’s fall; nor have I known
        A judgment meet [the bad] more fearfully.
        Here, take this ring; deliver the good queen,
        And those grave pledges of her murder’d honour,
        Her worthy father and her noble uncle.
              [_Exit_ SECOND LORD _with ring_. _Trumpets sound._
         How now! the meaning of these sounds?

          _Enter_ DEVONSHIRE, STAFFORD, _and_ SOLDIERS, _with_
                          HENGIST _prisoner_.

          HEN. The consumer has been here; she’s gone, she’s
           lost;
        In glowing cinders now lie all my joys:
        The headlong fortune of my rash captivity
        Strikes not so deep a wound into my hopes
        As thy dear loss.
          AUR. Her father and her uncle!
          FIRST LORD. They are indeed, my lord.
          AUR. Part of my wishes.
        What fortunate power has prevented[550] me,
        And ere my love came, brought them victory?
          FIRST LORD. My wonder sticks in Hengist, king of Kent.
          DEVONSHIRE. My lord, to make that plain which now I
             see
        Fix’d in astonishment; the only name
        Of your return and being, brought such gladness
        To this distracted kingdom, that, to express
        A thankfulness to heaven, it grew great
        In charitable actions; from which goodness
        We taste our liberty, who liv’d engag’d
        Upon the innocence of woman’s honour,
        (A kindness that even threaten’d to undo us):
        And having newly but enjoy’d the benefit
        And fruits of our enlargement, ’twas our happiness
        To intercept this monster of ambition,
        Bred in these times of usurpation,
        The rankness of whose insolence and treason
        Grew to such height, ’twas arm’d to bid you battle;
        Whom, as our fame’s redemption, on our knees
        We present captive.
          AUR. Had it needed reason,
        You richly came provided. I understood
        Not your deserts till now.—My honour’d lords,
        Is this that German Saxon, whose least thirst
        Could not be satisfied under a province?
          HENG. Had but my fate directed this bold arm
        To thy life, the whole kingdom had been mine;
        That was my hope’s great aim: I have a thirst
        Could never have been full quench’d under all;
        The whole must do’t, or nothing.
          AUR. A strange drought!
        And what a little ground shall death now teach you
        To be content withal!
          HENG. Why let it then,
        For none else can; you’ve nam’d the only way
        To limit my ambition; a full cure
        For all my fading hopes and sickly fears;
        Nor shall it be less welcome to me now,
        Than a fresh acquisition would have been
        Unto my new-built kingdoms. Life to me,
        ’Less it be glorious, is a misery.
          AUR. That pleasure we will do you.—Lead him out:
        And when we have inflicted our just doom
        On his usurping head, it will become
        Our pious care to see this realm secur’d
        From the convulsions it hath long endur’d.
                                                [_Exeunt omnes._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        BLURT, MASTER-CONSTABLE.




            _Blvrt, Master-Constable. Or The Spaniards Night-walke. As it
            hath bin sundry times priuately acted by the Children of
            Paules._

                          ———— ———— _Patresq; severi
                   Fronde comas vincti coenant, et carmina dictant._

            _London, Printed for Henry Rockytt, and are to be solde at the
            long shop vnder S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry._ 1602. 4to.

            This drama was reprinted (without notes, or any attempt to
            rectify the errors of the old copy,) in a volume of rare
            occurrence, edited by Chetwood, and entitled _A Select
            Collection of Old Plays_, Dublin, 12mo. 1750.

            “Blurt, master constable” (equivalent to—A fig for the
            constable!) was a proverbial phrase: see _English Prouerbs_, p.
            14 (first series), appended to Howell’s _Lexicon Tetraglotton_,
            1660. Gifford thinks that Ben Jonson alludes to Middleton’s
            comedy in a _Tale of a Tub_, where Hilts says, “You’ll clap a
            dog of wax as soon, _old Blurt_.” _Works_, vol. vi. p. 158.


                           DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.
          DUKE OF VENICE.
          HIPPOLITO, _brother to_ VIOLETTA.
          CAMILLO, _in love with_ VIOLETTA.
          BAPTISTA, }
          BENTIVOGLIO, } _Venetian gentlemen_.
          VIRGILIO, }
          ASORINO, }
          CURVETTO, _an old courtier_.
          FONTINELLE, _a French gentleman, taken prisoner by_
            CAMILLO.
          LAZARILLO DE TORMES, _a Spaniard_.
          DOYT, _page to_ HIPPOLITO.
          DANDYPRAT, _page to_ CAMILLO.
          TRUEPENNY, _page to_ VIOLETTA.
          PILCHER, _page to_ LAZARILLO.
          FRISCO, _servant to_ IMPERIA.
          BLURT, _master-constable_.
          SLUBBER, _a beadle, his clerk_.
          WOODCOCK, _a watchman_.
          FRIAR.
          _Gentlemen_, _Servingmen_, _Watchmen_, _&c._

          VIOLETTA, _sister to_ HIPPOLITO.
          IMPERIA, _a courtesan_.
          TRIVIA, }
          SIMPERINA, } _her attendants_.
          _Ladies._

                             SCENE, VENICE.




                        BLURT, MASTER-CONSTABLE.

                             --------------


                            ACT I. SCENE I.


          _A Room in_ CAMILLO’S _House_; _a Banquet set out_.

        _Enter_ CAMILLO, HIPPOLITO, BAPTISTA, BENTIVOGLIO,
            _and_ VIRGILIO (_with gloves in their hats, as
            having lately returned from war_), _leading in_
            VIOLETTA _and other Ladles_: DOYT _and_ DANDYPRAT
            _attending_.

          HIP. Ay, marry, sir, the only rising up in arms is in
        the arms of a woman: peace, I say still, is your only
        paradise, when every Adam may have his Christmas Eve.
        And[551] you take me lying any more by the cold sides of
        a brazen-face[d] field-piece, unless I have such a down
        pillow under me, I’ll give you leave to knock up both my
        golls[552] in my father’s hall, and hang hats upon these
        tenpenny nails.
          VIOL. And yet, brother, when, with the sharpest hooks of
        my wit, I laboured to pull you from the wars, you broke
        loose, like a horse that knew his own strength, and
        vowed nothing but a man of war should back you——
          HIP. I have been backed since, and almost unbacked too.
          VIOL. And swore that honour was never dyed in grain till
        it was dipt in the colours of the field.
          HIP. I am a new man, sister, and now cry a pox a’ that
        honour that must have none but barber-surgeons to wait
        upon’t, and a band of poor straggling rascals, that,
        every twinkling of an eye, forfeit their legs and arms
        into the Lord’s hands! Wenches, by Mars his sweaty buff-
        jerkin (for now all my oaths must smell a’ the soldado),
        I have seen more men’s heads spurned up and down like
        foot-balls at a breakfast, after the hungry cannons had
        picked them, than are maidenheads in Venice, and more
        legs of men served in at a dinner than ever I shall see
        legs of capons in one platter whilst I live.
          FIRST LADY. Perhaps all those were capons’ legs you did
        see.
          VIRG. Nay, mistress, I’ll witness against you for some
        of them.
          VIOL. I do not think, for all this, that my brother
        stood to it so lustily as he makes his brags for.
          THIRD LADY. No, no, these great talkers are never great
        doers.
          VIOL. Faith, brother, how many did you kill for your
        share?
          HIP. Not so many as thou hast done with that villanous
        eye by a thousand.
          VIOL. I thought so much; that’s just none.
          CAM. ’Tis not a soldier’s glory to tell how many
        lives he has ended, but how many he has saved: in
        both which honours the noble Hippolito had most
        excellent possession. Believe it, my fair mistress,
        though many men in a battle have done more, your
        brother in this equalled him who did most. He went
        from you a worthy gentleman; he brings with him that
        title that makes a gentleman most worthy, the name
        of a soldier; which how well and how soon he hath
        earned, would in me seem glorious to rehearse, in
        you to hear; but, because his own ear dwells so near
        my voice, I will play the ill neighbour, and cease
        to speak well of him.
          VIOL. An argument that either you dare not or love not
        to flatter.
          CAM. No more than I dare or love to do wrong; yet to
        make a chronicle of my friend’s nobly-acted deeds, would
        stand as far from flattery in me, as cowardice did from
        him.
          HIP. ’S foot, if all the wit in this company have
        nothing to set itself about but to run division upon me,
        why then e’en burn off mine ears indeed. But, my little
        mermaids, Signior Camillo does this that I now might
        describe the Ninevitical motion[553] of the whole
        battle, and so tell what he has done;—and come, shall I
        begin?
          FIRST LADY. O, for beauty’s love, a good motion!
          HIP. But I can tell you one thing, I shall make your
        hair stand up an end at some things.
          VIOL. Prithee, good brother soldier, keep the peace: our
        hair stand an end! pity a’ my heart, the next end would
        be of our wits. We hang out a white flag, most terrible
        Tamburlain,[554] and beg mercy. Come, come, let us
        neither have your Ninevitical motions, nor your
        swaggering battles. Why, my lord Camillo, you invited me
        hither to a banquet, not to the ballad of a pitched
        field.
          CAM. And here it stands, bright mistress, sweetly
        attending what doom your lips will lay upon it.
          VIOL. Ay, marry, sir, let our teeth describe this
        motion.
          SECOND LADY. We shall never describe it well for
        fumbling i’ th’ mouth.
          HIP. Yes, yes, I have a trick to make us understand one
        another, and[555] we fumble never so.
          VIOL. Meddle not with his tricks, sweetheart. Under
        pardon, my lord, though I am your guest, I’ll bestow
        myself. Sit, dear beauties: for the men, let them take
        up places themselves. I prithee, brother fighter, sit,
        and talk of any subject but this jangling law at arms.
                            [_They seat themselves._
          HIP. The law at legs then.
          VIOL. Will you be so lusty? no, nor legs neither; we’ll
        have them tied up too. Since you are among ladies,
        gallants, handle those things only that are fit for
        ladies.
          HIP. Agreed, so that we go not out of the compass of
        those things that are fit for lords.
          VIOL. Be’t so: what’s the theme then?
          FIRST LADY. Beauty; that fits us best.
          CAM. And of beauty what tongue would not speak the best,
        since it is the jewel that hangs upon the brow of
        heaven, the best colour that can be laid upon the cheek
        of earth? Beauty makes men gods immortal, by making
        mortal men to live ever in love.
          SECOND LADY. Ever? not so: I have heard that some men
        have died for love.
          VIOL. So have I, but I could never see’t. I’d ride forty
        miles to follow such a fellow to church; and would make
        more of a sprig of rosemary at his burial, than of a
        gilded bride-branch at mine own wedding.[556]
          CAM. Take you such delight in men that die for love?
          VIOL. Not in the men, nor in the death, but in the deed.
        Troth, I think he is not a sound man that will die for a
        woman; and yet I would never love a man soundly, that
        would not knock at death’s door for my love.
          HIP. I’d knock as long as I thought good, but have my
        brains knocked out when I entered, if I were he.
          CAM. What Venetian gentleman was there, that having this
        in his burgonet[557] did not (to prove his head worthy
        of the honour) do more than defy death to the very face?
        Trust us, ladies, our signiory stands bound in greater
        sums of thanks to your beauties for victory, than to our
        valour. My dear Violetta, one kiss to this picture of
        your whitest hand, when I was even faint with giving and
        receiving the dole of war, set a new edge on my sword,
        insomuch that
         I singl’d out a gallant spirit of France,
        And charg’d him with my lance in full career;
        And after rich exchange of noble courage,
        (The space of a good hour on either side),
        At last crying, Now for Violetta’s honour!
        I vanquish’d him, and him dismounted took,
        Not to myself, but prisoner to my love.
          VIOL. I have heard much praise of that French gallant:
        good my lord, bring him acquainted with our eyes.
          CAM. I will.—Go, boy, fetch noble Fontinelle.
                                              [_Exit_ DANDYPRAT.
          HIP. Will your French prisoner drink well, or else cut
        his throat?
          CAM. O, no! he cannot brook it.
          HIP. The pox he can[not]! ’S light, methinks a Frenchman
        should have a good courage to wine, for many of them be
        exceeding hot fiery whoresons, and resolute as Hector,
        and as valiant as Troilus; then come off and on bravely,
        and lie by it, and sweat for’t too, upon a good and a
        military advantage.
          CAM. Prithee, have done; here comes the prisoner.

                  _Enter_ FONTINELLE _and_ DANDYPRAT.

          VIOL. My Lord Camillo, is this the gentleman
        Whose valour by your valour is subdued?
          CAM. It is, fair lady; and I yield him up
        To be your beauty’s worthy prisoner.
        Lord Fontinelle, think your captivity
        Happy in this; she that hath conquer’d me
        Receives my conquest as my love’s fair fee.
          VIOL. Fair stranger, droop not, since the chance of
             wars
        Brings to the soldier death, restraint, or scars.
          FONT. Lady, I know the fortune of the field
        Is death with honour, or with shame to yield,
        As I have done.
          VIOL. In that no scandal lies:
        Who dies when he may live, he doubly dies.
          FONT. My reputation’s lost.
          VIOL. Nay, that’s not so;
        You fled[558] not, but were vanquish’d by your foe:
        The eye of war respects not you nor him;
        It is our fate will have us lose or win:
        You will disdain if I you prisoner call?
          FONT. No, but rejoice since I am beauty’s thrall.
          HIP. Enough of this; come, wenches, shake your heels.
          CAM. Music, advance thee on thy golden wing,
        And dance division from sweet string to string.
          FONT. Camillo, I shall curb[559] thy tyranny,
        In making me that lady’s prisoner:
        She has an angel’s body, but within’t
        Her coy heart says there lies a heart of flint.
                  [_Music for a measure:[560] whilst_ FONTINELLE
                       _speaks, they dance a strain_.
         Such beauty be my jailor! a heavenly hell!
        The darkest dungeon which spite can devise
        To throw this carcass in, her glorious eyes
        Can make as lightsome as the fairest chamber
        In Paris Louvre. Come, captivity,
        And chain me to her looks! How am I tost,
        Being twice in mind, as twice in body lost!
                   [_Here_ VIOLETTA _on a sudden breaks off; the
                        rest stand talking_.
           CAM. Not the measure out, fair mistress?
          VIOL. No, fair servant, not the measure out: I have, on
        the sudden, a foolish desire to be out of the measure.
          CAM. What breeds that desire?
          VIOL. Nay, I hope it is no breeding matter. Tush, tush,
        by my maidenhead, I will not: the music likes[561] me
        not, and I have a shoe wrings me to th’ heart; besides,
        I have a woman’s reason, I will not dance, because I
        will not dance. Prithee, dear hero, take my prisoner
        there into the measure: fie, I cannot abide to see a man
        sad nor idle. I’ll be out once, as the music is in mine
        ear.
          FONT. Lady, bid him[562] whose heart no sorrow feels
        Tickle the rushes with his wanton heels:
        I’ve[563] too much lead at mine.
          FIRST LADY. I’ll make it light.
          FONT. How?
          FIRST LADY. By a nimble dance.
          FONT. You hit it right.
          FIRST LADY. Your keeper bids you dance.
          FONT. Then I obey:
        My heart I feel grows light, it melts away.
                              [_They dance_; VIOLETTA _stands by
                                     marking_ FONTINELLE.
          VIOL. In troth, a very pretty Frenchman: the carriage of
        his body likes[564] me well; so does his footing; so
        does his face; so does his eye above his face; so does
        himself, above all that can be above himself.
         Camillo, thou hast play’d a foolish part:
        Thy prisoner makes a slave of thy love’s heart.
         Shall Camillo then sing Willow, willow, willow?[565]
        not for the world. No, no, my French prisoner; I will
        use thee Cupid knows how, and teach thee to fall into
        the hands of a woman. If I do not feed thee with fair
        looks, ne’er let me live; if thou get’st out of my
        fingers till I have thy very heart, ne’er let me love;
        nothing but thy life shall serve my turn; and how
        otherwise I’ll plague thee, monsieur, you and I’ll deal:
        only this, because I’ll be sure he shall not start, I’ll
        lock him in a little low room besides[566] himself,
        where his wanton eye shall see neither sun nor moon. So,
        the dance is done, and my heart has done her worst,—made
        me in love. Farewell, my lord; I have much haste, you
        have many thanks; I am angered a little, but am greatly
        pleased. If you wonder that I take this strange leave,
        excuse it thus, that women are strange fools, and will
        take any thing.                                [_Exit._
          HIP. Tricks, tricks; kerry merry buff! How now, lad, in
        a trance?
          CAM. Strange farewell! After, dear Hippolito.
        O, what a maze is love of joy and woe!
                              [_Exeunt_ CAMILLO _and_ HIPPOLITO.
          FONT. Strange frenzy! After, wretched Fontinelle.
        O, what a heaven is love! O, what a hell!
                [_Exit; and then exeunt_ LADIES, BAPTISTA, _&c._


                               SCENE II.


                  _A Street: before_ BLURT’s _House_.

              _Enter_ LAZARILLO _melancholy, and_ PILCHER.

          LAZ. Boy, I am melancholy, because I burn.
          PILCH. And I am melancholy, because I am a-cold.
          LAZ. I pine away with the desire of flesh.
          PILCH. It’s neither flesh nor fish that I pine for, but
        for both.
          LAZ. Pilcher, Cupid hath got me a stomach, and I long
        for laced mutton.[567]
          PILCH. Plain mutton, without a lace, would serve me.
          LAZ. For as your tame monkey is your only best, and most
        only beast to your Spanish lady; or, as your tobacco is
        your only smoker away of rheum, and all other rheumatic
        diseases; or, as your Irish louse does bite most
        naturally fourteen weeks after the change of your
        saffron-seamed shirt; or, as the commodities which are
        sent out of the Low Countries, and put in vessels called
        mother Cornelius’ dry-fats[568], are most common in
        France; so it pleaseth the Destinies that I should
        thirst to drink out of a most sweet Italian vessel,
        being a Spaniard.
          PILCH. What vessel is that, signior?
          LAZ. A woman, Pilcher, the moist-handed Madonna Imperia,
        a most rare and divine creature.
          PILCH. A most rascally damned courtesan.
          LAZ. Boy, hast thou foraged the country for a new
        lodging? for I have sworn to lay my bones in this
        chitty[569] of Venice.
          PILCH. Any man that sees us will swear that we shall
        both lay our bones, and nothing but bones, and[570] we
        stalk here longer. They tell me, signior, I must go to
        the constable, and he is to see you lodged.

          LAZ. Inquire for that busy member of the chitty.[571]

        _Enter_ DOYT _and_ DANDYPRAT, _passing over the stage_.

          PILCH. I will; and here come a leash of informers. Save
        you, plump youths.
          DANDY. And thee, my lean stripling.
          PILCH. Which is the constable’s house?
          DOYT. That at the sign of the Brown-bill.[572]
          PILCH. Farewell.
          DANDY. Why, and farewell? The rogue’s made of pie-crust,
        he’s so short.
          PILCH. The officious gentleman inherits here.
          LAZ. Knock, or enter, and let thy voice pull him out by
        the ears.

                      [PILCHER _knocks at the constable’s door_.

          DOYT. ’Slid, Dandyprat, this is the Spanish curtal[573]
        that in the last battle fled twenty miles ere he looked
        behind him.
          DANDY. Doyt, he did the wiser: but, sirrah, this block
        shall be a rare threshold for us to whet our wits upon.
        Come, let’s about our business; and if here we find him
        at our return, he shall find[574] us this month in
        knavery.                             [_Exit with_ DOYT.
          PILCH. What, ho! Nobody speaks? Where dwells the
        constable?

              _Enter from the house_ BLURT _and_ SLUBBER.

          BLURT. Here dwells the constable.—Call assistance, give
        them my full charge[575] raise, if you see cause.—Now,
        sir, what are you, sir?
          PILCH. Follower to that Spanish-leather gentleman.
          BLURT. And what are you, sir, that cry out upon me?—Look
        to his tools.—What are you, sir? speak, what are you? I
        charge you, what are you?
          LAZ. Most clear Mirror of Magistrates,[576] I am a
        servitor to god Mars.
          BLURT. For your serving of God I am not to meddle: why
        do you raise me?
          LAZ. I desire to have a wide room in your favour: sweet
        blood, cast away your name upon me; for I neither know
        you by your face nor by your voice.
          BLURT. It may be so, sir: I have two voices in any
        company; one as I am master-constable, another as I am
        Blurt, and the third as I am Blurt master-constable.
          LAZ. I understand you are a mighty pillar or post in the
        chitty.[577]
          BLURT. I am a poor post, but not to stand at every man’s
        door, without my bench of bill-men.[578] I am (for a
        better) the duke’s own image, and charge you, in his
        name, to obey me.
          LAZ. I do so.
          BLURT. I am to stand, sir, in any bawdy-house, or sink
        of wickedness. I am the duke’s own grace, and in any
        fray or resurrection am to bestir my stumps as well as
        he. I charge you, know this staff.
          SLUB. Turn the arms to him.
          BLURT. Upon this may I lean, and no man say black’s mine
        eye.
          LAZ. Whosoever says you have a black eye, is a
        camooch.[579] Most great Blurt, I do unpent-house the
        roof of my carcass,[580] and touch the knee of thy
        office, in Spanish compliment. I desire to sojourn in
        your chitty.[581]
          BLURT. Sir, sir, for fault of a better, I am to charge
        you not to keep a soldiering in our city without a
        precept[239.10]: besides, by my office, I am to search
        and examine you. Have you the duke’s hand to pass?
          LAZ. Signior, no; I have the general’s hand at large,
        and all his fingers.
          BLURT. Except it be for the general good of the
        commonwealth, the general cannot lead you up and down
        our city.
          LAZ. I have the general’s hand to pass through the world
        at my pleasure.
          BLURT. At your pleasure! that’s rare. Then, rowly,
        powly, our wives shall lie at your command. Your general
        has no such authority in my precinct; and therefore I
        charge you pass no further.
          LAZ. I tell thee I will pass through the world, thou
        little morsel of justice, and eat twenty such as thou
        art.
          BLURT. Sir, sir, you shall find Venice out of the world:
        I’ll tickle you for that.
          LAZ. I will pass through the world, as Alexander Magnus
        did, to conquer.
          BLURT. As Alexander of Saint Magnus did! that’s another
        matter: you might have informed this at the first, and
        you never needed to have come to your answer. Let me see
        your pass: if it be not the duke’s hand, I’ll tickle you
        for all this: quickly, I pray; this staff is to walk in
        other places.
          LAZ. There it is.
          BLURT. Slubber, read it over.
          LAZ. Read it yourself. What besonian[582] is that?
          BLURT. This is my clerk, sir; he has been clerk to a
        good many bonds and bills[583] of mine. I keep him only
        to read, for I cannot; my office will not let me.
          PILCH. Why do you put on your spectacles then?
          BLURT. To see that he read right. How now, Slubber? is’t
        the duke’s hand? I’ll tickle him else.
          SLUB. Mass, ’tis not like his hand.
          BLURT. Look well; the duke has a wart on the back of his
        hand.
          SLUB. Here’s none, on my word, master-constable, but a
        little blot.
          BLURT. Blot! let’s see, let’s see. Ho, that stands for
        the wart; do you see the trick of that? Stay, stay; is
        there not a little prick in the hand? for the duke’s
        hand had a prick in’t, when I was with him, with opening
        oysters.
          SLUB. Yes, mass, here’s one; besides, ’tis a goodly
        great long hand.
          BLURT. So has the duke a goodly huge hand; I have shook
        him by it (God forgive me!) ten thousand times. He must
        pass, like Alexander of Saint Magnus.—Well, sir,—’tis
        your duty to stand bare,—the duke has sent his fist to
        me, and I were a Jew if I should shrink for it. I obey;
        you must pass: but, pray, take heed with what dice you
        pass; I mean, what company; for Satan is most busy where
        he finds one like himself. Your name, sir?
          LAZ. Lazarillo de Tormes in Castile, cousin-german to
        the adelantado[584] of Spain.
          BLURT. Are you so, sir? God’s blessing on your heart!
        Your name again, sir, if it be not too tedious for you?
          LAZ. Lazarillo de Tormes in Castile, cousin-german to
        the Spanish adelantado.
          SLUB. I warrant, he’s a great man in his own country.
          BLURT. Has a good name: Slubber, set it down: write,
        Lazarus in torment at the Castle, and a cozening German
        at the sign of the Falantido-diddle in Spain. So, sir,
        you are ingrost: you must give my officer a groat; it’s
        nothing to me, signior.
          LAZ. I will cancel when it comes to a sum.
          BLURT. Well, sir, well, he shall give you an item
        for’t.—Make a bill, and he’ll tear it, he says.
          LAZ. Most admirable Blurt, I am a man of war, and
        profess fighting.
          BLURT. I charge you, in the duke’s name, keep the peace.
          LAZ. By your sweet favour, most dear Blurt, you charge
        too fast: I am a hanger-on upon Mars, and have a few
        crowns.
          PILCH. Two; his own and mine.               [_Aside._
          LAZ. And desire you to point out a fair lodging for me
        and my train.
          BLURT.’Tis my office, signior, to take men up a’ nights;
        but, if you will, my maids shall take you up a’
        mornings. Since you profess fighting, I will commit you,
        signior, to mine own house. But will you pitch and
        pay,[585] or will your worship run—
          LAZ. I scorn to run from the face of Thamer Cham.[586]
          BLURT. Then, sir, you mean not to run?
          LAZ. Signior, no.
          BLURT. Bear witness, Slubber, that his answer is,
        Signior, no: so now, if he runs upon the score, I have
        him straight upon Signior, no. This is my house,
        signior; enter.
          LAZ. March, excellent Blurt. Attend, Pilcher.
                      [_Exeunt_ LAZARILLO, BLURT, _and_ SLUBBER.

                     _Enter_ DOYT _and_ DANDYPRAT.

          PILCH. Upon your trencher, signior, most hungerly.
          DOYT. Now, sirrah, where’s thy master?
          PILCH. The constable has prest him.
          DOYT. What, for a soldier?
          PILCH. Ay, for a soldier; but ere he’ll go, I think,
        indeed, he and I together shall press the constable.
          DANDY. No matter; squeeze him, and leave no more liquor
        in him than in a dried neat’s tongue. Sirrah thin-gut,
        what’s thy name?
          PILCH. My name, you chops! why, I am of the blood of the
        Pilchers.
          DANDY. Nay, ’s foot, if one should kill thee, he could
        not be banged for’t, for he would shed no blood; there’s
        none in thee. Pilcher! thou’rt a most pitiful dried
        one.[587]
          DOYT. I wonder thy master does not slice thee, and
        swallow thee for an anchovies.
          PILCH. He wants wine, boy, to swallow me down, for he
        wants money to swallow down wine. But farewell; I must
        dog my master.
          DANDY. As long as thou dogst a Spaniard, thou’lt ne’er
        be fatter: but stay; our haste is as great as thine;
        yet, to endear ourselves into thy lean acquaintance,
        cry, rivo[588] hoh! laugh and be fat; and for joy that
        we are met, we’ll meet and be merry. Sing.
          PILCH. I’ll make a shift to squeak.
          DOYT. And I.
          DANDY. And I, for my profession is to shift[589] as well
        as you: hem!

                               SONG.[590]

            DOYT.  _What meat eats the Spaniard?_
            PILCH. _Dried pitchers and poor-john._[591]
            DANDY. _Alas, thou art almost marr’d!_
            PILCH. _My cheeks are fall’n and gone._
            DOYT.  _Wouldst thou not leap at a piece of meat?_
            PILCH. _O, how my teeth do water! I could eat:
                    ’Fore the heavens, my flesh is almost gone
                    With eating of pilcher and poor-john._
                                                      [_Exeunt._




                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                            _A Street._[592]

            _Enter_ FONTINELLE _from tennis, and_ TRUEPENNY.

          FONT. Am I so happy then?
          TRUE. Nay, sweet monsieur—
          FONT. O, boy, thou hast new-wing’d my captiv’d soul!
        Now to my fortune all the Fates may yield,
        For I have won where first I lost the field.
          TRUE. Why, sir, did my mistress prick you with the
        Spanish needle[593] of her love, before I summoned you
        from her to this parley?
          FONT. Doubt’s[t] thou that, boy?
          TRUE. Of mine honesty, I doubt extremely, for I cannot
        see the little god’s tokens upon you: there is as much
        difference between you and a lover, as between a cuckold
        and a unicorn.
          FONT. Why, boy?
          TRUE. For you do not wear a pair of ruffled, frowning,
        ungartered stockings, like a gallant that hides his
        small-timbered legs with a quail-pipe boot:[594] your
        hose stands upon too many points,[595] and are not
        troubled with that falling sickness which follows pale,
        meagre, miserable, melancholy lovers: your hands are not
        groping continually—
          FONT. Where, my little observer?
          TRUE. In your greasy pocket, sir, like one that wants a
        cloak for the rain, and yet is still weatherbeaten: your
        hat nor head are not of the true heigh-ho block, for it
        should be broad-brimmed, limber like the skin of a white
        pudding when the meat is out, the facing fatty, the felt
        dusty, and not entered into any band;[596] but your hat
        is of the nature of a loose, light, heavy-swelling
        wench, too strait-laced. I tell you, monsieur, a lover
        should be all loose from the sole of the foot rising
        upward, and from the bases or confines of the slop[597]
        falling downwards. If you were in my mistress’s chamber,
        you should find othergates[598] privy signs of love
        hanging out there.
          FONT. Have your little eyes watched so narrowly?
          TRUE. O, sir, a page must have a cat’s eye, a spaniel’s
        leg, a whore’s tongue (a little tasting of the
        cog[599]), a catchpoll’s hand,—what he gripes is his
        own; and a little, little bawdy.[600]
          FONT. Fair Violetta, I will wear thy love,
        Like this French order, near unto my heart.
        _Via_[601] for fate! Fortune, lo, this is all,
        At grief’s rebound I’ll mount, although I fall!

          _Enter_ CAMILLO _and_ HIPPOLITO _from tennis_; DOYT
            _and_ DANDYPRAT _with their cloaks and rapiers_.

          CAM. Now, by Saint Mark, he’s a most treacherous
           villain.
        Dare the base Frenchman’s eye gaze on my love?
          HIP. Nay, sweet rogue, why wouldst thou make his face a
        vizard, to have two loopholes only? When he comes to a
        good face, may he not do with his eyes what he will? ’S
        foot, if I were as he, I’d pull them out, and if I
        wist[602] they would anger thee.
          CAM. Thou add’st heat to my rage. Away, stand back,
        Dishonour’d slave, more treacherous than base!
        This is the instance of my scorn’d disgrace.
          FONT. Thou ill-advis’d Italian, whence proceeds
        This sudden fury?
          CAM. Villain, from thee.
          HIP. Hercules, stand between them!
          FONT. Villain? by my blood,
        I am as free-born as your Venice duke!
        Villain? Saint Denis and my life to boot,
        Thy lips shall kiss this pavement or my foot.
          HIP. Your foot, with a pox! I hope you’re no pope, sir:
        his lips shall kiss my sister’s soft lip, and thine the
        tough lips of this. Nay, sir, I do but shew you that I
        have a tool. Do you hear, Saint Denis? but that we both
        stand upon the narrow bridge of honour, I should cut
        your throat now, for pure love you bear to my sister,
        but that I know you would set out a throat.
          CAM. Wilt thou not stab the peasant
        That thus dishonours both thyself and me?
          HIP. Saint Mark set his marks upon me then! Stab? I’ll
        have my shins broken, ere I’ll scratch so much as the
        skin off a’ the law of arms. Shall I make a Frenchman
        cry O! before the fall of the leaf? not I, by the cross
        of this Dandyprat.[603]
          DANDY. If you will, sir, you shall coin me into a
        shilling.
          HIP. I shall lay too heavy a cross upon thee then.
          CAM. Is this a time to jest? Boy, call my servants.
          DOYT. Gentlemen, to the dresser![604]
          CAM. You rogue, what dresser?

                          _Enter Servingmen._

                                Seize on Fontinelle,
        And lodge him in a dungeon presently.
          FONT. He steps upon his death that stirs a foot.
          CAM. That shall I try: as in the field before
        I made thee stoop, so here I’ll make thee bow.
          FONT. Thou play’dst the soldier then, the villain now.
               [CAMILLO _and his men set upon him, get him down,
                    disweapon him, and hold him fast_.
          FONT. Treacherous Italians!
          CAM. Hale him to a dungeon.—
        There, if your thoughts can apprehend the form
        Of Violetta, doat on her rare feature;
        Or if your proud flesh, with a sparing diet,
        Can still retain her swelling sprightfulness,
        Then court, instead of her, the croaking vermin
        That people that most solitary vault.
          HIP. But, sirrah Camillo, wilt thou play the wise and
        venerable bearded master-constable, and commit him
        indeed, because he would be meddling in thy precinct,
        and will not put off the cap of his love to the brown-
        bill[605] of thy desires? Well, thou hast given the law
        of arms a broken pate already; therefore, if thou wilt
        needs turn broker,[606] and be a cut-throat too, do. For
        my part, I’ll go get a sweet ball, and wash my hands of
        it.
          CAM. Away with him! my life shall answer it.
          FONT. To prison must I then? Well, I will go,
        And with a light-wing’d spirit insult o’er woe;
        For in the darkest hell on earth I’ll find
        Her fair idea to content my mind.
        Yet France and Italy with blister’d tongue
        Shall publish thy dishonour in my wrong.
        O, now how happy wert thou, could’st thou lodge me
        Where I could leave to love her!
          CAM. By heaven, I can.
          FONT. Thou canst? O, happy man!
        This [is] a kind of new-invented law,
        First feed the axe, after produce the saw.
        Her heart no doubt will thy affections feel,
        For thou’lt plead sighs in blood and tears in steel.
        Boy, tell my love her love thus sighing spake,
        I’ll vail[607] my crest to death for her dear sake.
                             [_Exit, guarded by the Servingmen._
          CAM. Boy? what boy is that?
          HIP. Is’t you, Sir Pandarus, the broking[608] knight of
        Troy? Are your two legs the pair of tressels for the
        Frenchman to get up upon my sister?
          TRUE. By the Nine Worthies, worthy gallants, not I: I a
        gentleman for conveyance? I Sir Pandarus? Would Troy,
        then, were in my breeches, and I burnt worse than poor
        Troy! Sweet signior, you know, I know, and all Venice
        knows, that my mistress scorns double-dealing with her
        heels.
          HIP. With her heels? O, here’s a sure pocket dag![609]
        and my sister shoots him off, snip-snap, at her
        pleasure. Sirrah Mephostophilis,[610] did not you bring
        letters from my sister to the Frenchman?
          TRUE. Signior, no.
          CAM. Did not you fetch him out of the tennis court?
          TRUE. No, _point, par ma foi_: you see I have many
        tongues speak for me.
          HIP. Did not he follow your crackship[611] at a beck
        given?
          TRUE. _Ita_, true, certes, he spied, and I spitting
        thus, went thus.
          HIP. But were stayed thus.
          TRUE. You hold a’ my side, and therefore I must needs
        stick to you; ’tis true: I going, he followed, and
        following fingered me, just as your worship does now;
        but I struggled and straggled, and wriggled and
        wraggled, and at last cried _vale, valete_, as I do now,
        with this fragment of a rhyme,
         My lady is grossly fall’n in love, and yet her waist is
           slender;
        Had I not slipt away, you would have made my buttocks
           tender.                     [_Exit._

          DANDY. Shall Doyt and I play the bloodhounds, and after
        him?
          CAM. No, let him run.
          HIP. Not for this wager of my sister’s love; run! away,
        Dandyprat, catch Truepenny, and hold him; thyself shall
        pass more current.[612]
          DANDY. I fly, sir; your Dandyprat is as light as a clipt
        angel.[613]                                    [_Exit._
          HIP. Nay, God’s lid, after him, Camillo; reply not, but
        away.
          CAM. Content; you know where to meet.        [_Exit._
          HIP. For I know that the only way to win a wench is not
        to woo her; the only way to have her fast is to have her
        loose; the only way to triumph over her is to make her
        fall; and the way to make her fall,—
          DOYT. Is to throw her down.
          HIP. Are you so cunning, sir?
          DOYT. O Lord, sir, and have so perfect a master?
          HIP. Well, sir, you know the gentlewoman that dwells in
        the midst of Saint Mark’s Street?
          DOYT. Midst of Saint Mark’s Street, sir?
          HIP. A pox on you! the flea-bitten-faced lady.
          DOYT. O, sir, the freckle-cheeke[d] Madonna; I know her,
        signior, as well—
          HIP. Not as I do, I hope, sir.
          DOYT. No, sir, I’d be loath to have such inward
        acquaintance with her as you have.
          HIP. Well, sir, slip, go presently to her, and from me
        deliver to her own white hands Fontinelle’s picture.
          DOYT. Indeed, sir, she loves to have her chamber hung
        with the pictures of men.
          HIP. She does. I’ll keep my sister’s eyes and his
        painted face asunder. Tell her, besides, the masque
        holds, and this the night, and nine the hour: say we are
        all for her: away.
          DOYT. And she’s for you all, were you an army.
                                            [_Exeunt severally._


                               SCENE II.


                     _A Room in_ IMPERIA’s _House_.

          _Enter_ IMPERIA, _and_ TRIVIA _and_ SIMPERINA _with
                               perfumes_.

          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, fie, by the light oath of my fan,
        the weather is exceeding tedious and faint. Trivia,
        Simperina, stir, stir, stir: one of you open the
        casements, t’other take a ventoy[614] and gently cool
        my face. Fie, I ha’ such an exceeding high colour, I
        so sweat! Simperina, dost hear? prithee be more
        compendious; why, Simperina!
          SIMP. Here, madam.
          IMP. Press down my ruff before. Away; fie, how thou
        blowest upon me! thy breath, (God’s me!) thy breath,
        fie, fie, fie, fie, it takes off all the painting and
        colour from my cheek. In good faith, I care not if I go
        and be sick presently: heigho, my head so aches with
        carrying this bodkin! in troth I’ll try if I can be
        sick.
          TRIV. Nay, good sweet lady.
          SIMP. You know a company of gallants will be here at
        night: be not out of temper, sweet mistress.
          IMP. In good troth, if I be not sick, I must be
        melancholy then. This same gown never comes on but I am
        so melancholy and so heart-burnt! ’tis a strange
        garment: I warrant, Simperina, the foolish tailor that
        made it was troubled with the stitch when he composed
        it.
          SIMP. That’s very likely, madam; but it makes you have,
        O, a most incony[615] body!
          IMP. No, no, no, no, by Saint Mark, the waist is not
        long enough, for I love a long and tedious waist;
        besides, I have a most ungodly middle in it; and, fie,
        fie, fie, fie, it makes me bend i’ th’ back: O, let me
        have some music!
          SIMP. That’s not the fault in your gown, madam, but of
        your bawdy.                                   [_Music._
          IMP. Fa, la, la, fa, la, la![616]—indeed, the bending of
        the back is the fault of the body,—la, la, la, la! fa,
        la, la! fa, la, la, la, la, la!
          TRIV. O, rich!
          SIMP. O, rare!
          IMP. No, no, no, no, no; ’tis slight and common all
        that I do. Prithee, Simperina, do not ingle[617] me;
        do not flatter me, Trivia: I ha’ never a cast gown
        till the next week. Fa, la, la, la, la, la, fa, la,
        la, fa, la, la, &c.[618] This stirring to and fro has
        done me much good. A song, I prithee. I love these
        French movings: O, they are so clean! if you tread
        them true, you shall hit them to a hair. Sing, sing,
        sing; some odd and fantastical thing, for I cannot
        abide these dull and lumpish tunes; the musician
        stands longer a-pricking them than I would do to hear
        them. No, no, no, give me your light ones, that go
        nimbly and quick, and are full of changes, and carry
        sweet division. Ho, prithee, sing! Stay, stay, stay;
        here’s Hippolito’s sonnet; first read it, and then
        sing it.

                               SONG,[619]
                      _By_ TRIVIA _and_ SIMPERINA.

            First.     _In a fair woman what thing is best?_
            Second.    _I think a coral lip._
            First.     _No, no, you jest;_
                       _She has a better thing._
            Second.    _Then ’tis a pretty eye._
            First.     _Yet ’tis a better thing,_
                       _Which more delight does bring._
            Second.    _Then ’tis a cherry cheek._
            First.     _No, no, you lie;_
                       _Were neither coral lip, nor cherry
                         cheek, nor pretty eyes,_[620]
                       _Were not her swelling breast stuck with
                         strawberries,_
                       _Nor had smooth hand, soft skin, white
                         neck, pure eye,_
                       _Yet she at this alone your love can
                         tie._
                       _It is, O, ’tis the only joy to men,_
                       _The only praise to women!_
            [Second]                          _What is’t then?_
            First.     _This it is, O, this it is, and in a
                         woman’s middle it is plac’d,_
                       _In a most beauteous body, a heart most
                         chaste!_
                       _This is the jewel kings may buy;_
                       _If women sell this jewel, women lie._
            [DOYT _knocks within_; FRISCO _answers within_.

          FRIS. [_within_] Who, the pox, knocks?
          DOYT. [_within_] One that will knock thy coxcomb, if he
        do not enter.
          FRIS. [_within_] If thou dost not enter, how canst thou
        knock me?
          DOYT. [_within_] Why then I’ll knock thee when I do
        enter.
          FRIS. [_within_] Why then thou shalt not enter, but
        instead of me knock thy heels.
          DOYT. [_within_] Frisco, I am Doyt, Hippolito’s page.
          FRIS. [_within_] And I am Frisco, squire to a bawdy-
        house.
          DOYT. [_within_] I have a jewel to deliver to thy
        mistress.
          FRIS. [_within_] Is’t set with precious stones?
          DOYT. [_within_] Thick, thick, thick.
          FRIS. [_within_] Why, enter then, thick, thick, thick.
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, who makes that yawling at
        door?

             _Enter_ FRISCO, _and_ DOYT _with_ FONTINELLE’s
                               _picture_.

          FRIS. Here’s signior Hippolito’s man (that shall be)
        come to hang you.
          IMP. Trivia, strip that villain; Simperina, pinch him,
        slit his wide nose. Fie, fie, fie, I’ll have you gelded
        for this lustiness.
          FRIS. And[621] she threatens to geld me unless I be
        lusty, what shall poor Frisco do?
          IMP. Hang me?
          FRIS. Not I; hang me if you will, and set up my quarters
        too.
          IMP. Hippolito’s boy come to hang me?
          DOYT. To hang you with jewels, sweet and gentle; that’s
        Frisco’s meaning, and that’s my coming.
          IMP. Keep the door.
          FRIS. That’s my office: indeed, I have been your door-
        keeper so long, that all the hinges, the spring-locks,
        and the ring, are worn to pieces. How if any body knock
        at the door?
          IMP. Let them enter. [_Exit_ FRISCO.] Fie, fie, fie,
        fie, fie, his great tongue does so run through my little
        ears! ’tis more harsh than a younger brother’s courting
        of a gentlewoman, when he has no crowns. Boy!
          DOYT. At your service.
          IMP. My service? alas, alas, thou canst do me small
        service! Did thy master send this painted gentleman to
        me?
          DOYT. This painted gentleman to you.
          IMP. Well, I will hang his picture up by the walls, till
        I see his face; and, when I see his face, I’ll take his
        picture down. Hold it, Trivia.
          TRIV. It’s most sweetly made.
          IMP. Hang him up, Simperina.
          SIMP. It’s a most sweet man.
          IMP. And does the masque hold?—Let me see it again.
          DOYT. If their vizards hold, here you shall see all
        their blind cheeks: this is the night, nine the hour,
        and I the jack[622] that gives warning.
          SIMP. He gives warning, mistress; shall I set him out?
          DOYT. You shall not need; I can set out myself.
                                                        [_Exit._
          IMP. Flaxen hair, and short too; O, that’s the French
        cut! but fie, fie, fie, these[623] flaxen-haired men are
        such pulers, and such piddlers, and such chicken-hearts
        (and yet great quarrellers), that when they court a lady
        they are for the better part bound to the peace! No, no,
        no, no; your black-haired man (so he be fair) is your
        only sweet man, and in any service the most active. A
        banquet, Trivia; quick, quick, quick.
          TRIV. In a twinkling.—’Slid, my mistress cries like the
        rod-woman,—quick, quick, quick, buy any rosemary and
        bays?                                [_Aside and exit._
          IMP. A little face, but a lovely face: fie, fie, fie, no
        matter what face he make, so the other parts be
        legitimate and go upright. Stir, stir, Simperina; be
        doing, be doing quickly; move, move, move.
          SIMP. Most incontinently.[624]—Move, move, move? O,
        sweet!                               [_Aside and exit._
          IMP. Heigho! as I live, I must love thee, and suck
        kisses from thy lips. Alack, that women should fall thus
        deeply in love with dumb things, that have no feeling!
        but they are women’s crosses, and the only way to take
        them is to take them patiently.

        _Re-enter_ FRISCO, _and_ TRIVIA _and_ SIMPERINA _setting
                            out a banquet_.

        Heigho! set music, Frisco!
          FRIS. Music, if thou hast not a hard heart, speak to my
        mistress.                                     [_Music._
          IMP. Say he scorn to marry me, yet he shall stand me in
        some stead by being my Ganymede. If he be the most
        decayed gallant in all Venice, I will myself undo myself
        and my whole state, to set him up again. Though speaking
        truth would save my life, I will lie to do him pleasure.
        Yet to tell lies may hurt the soul: fie, no, no, no;
        souls are things to be trodden under our feet when we
        dance after love’s pipe. Therefore here, hang this
        counterfeit[625] at my bed’s feet.
          FRIS. If he be counterfeit, nail him up[626] upon one of
        your posts.                   [_Exit with the picture._
          IMP. By the moist hand of love, I swear I will be his
        lottery, and he shall never draw but it shall be a
        prize!

                       CURVETTO _knocks within_.

          FRIS. [_within_] Who knocks?
          CUR. [_within_] Why, ’tis I, knave.
          FRIS. [_within_] Then, knave, knock there still.
          CUR. [_within_] Wut[627] open door?
          FRIS. [_within_] Yes, when I list I will.
          CUR. [_within_] Here’s money.
          FRIS. [_within_] Much![628]
          CUR. [_within_] Here’s gold.
          FRIS. [_within_] Away!
          CUR. [_within_] Knave, open.
          FRIS. [_within_] Call to our maids; good[629] night; we
        are all aslopen.[630]                      [_Entering._

        Mistress, if you have ever a pinnace to set out, you may
        now have it manned and rigged; for signior Curvetto,—he
        that cries, _I am, an old courtier, but lie close, lie
        close_, when our maids swear he lies as wide as any
        courtier in Italy—
          IMP. Do we care how he lies?
                                [CURVETTO _knocks again within_.

          FRIS. Anon, anon, anon!—this old hoary red deer serves
        himself in at your keyhole.
          CUR. [_within_] What, Frisco!
          FRIS. Hark! shall he enter the breach?
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, I wonder what this gurnet’s head
        makes here! Yet bring him in; he will serve for picking
        meat. [_Exit_ FRISCO.] Let music play, for I will feign
        myself to be asleep.                           [_Music._

                   _Re-enter_ FRISCO _with_ CURVETTO.

          CUR. [_giving_ FRISCO _money_] Threepence, and here’s a
           teston;[631] yet, take all;
        Coming to jump, we must be prodigal:
        Hem!
        I’m[632] an old courtier, and I can lie close:
        Put up, Frisco, put up, put up, put up.
          FRIS. Any thing at your hands, sir, I will put up,
        because you seldom pull out any thing.
          SIMP. Softly, sweet signior Curvetto, for she’s fast.
          CUR. Hah! fast? my roba[633] fast, and but young
             night?
        She’s wearied, wearied:—ah, ha, hit I right?
          SIMP. How, sir, wearied? marry, foh!
          FRIS. Wearied, sir? marry, muff![634]
          CUR. No words here, mouse? no words, no words, sweet
             rose?
        I’m[635] an hoary courtier, and lie close, lie close.
        Hem!
          FRIS. An old hoary courtier? why, so has a jowl of ling
        and a musty whiting been, time out of mind. Methinks,
        signior, you should not be so old by your face.
          CUR. I have a good heart, knave; and a good heart
        Is a good face-maker; I’m[636] young, quick, brisk.
        I was a reveller in a long stock,[637]
        (There’s not a gallant now fills such a stock,)
        Plump hose, pan’d,[638] stuft with hair (hair then was
           held
        The lightest stuffing), a fair cod-piece,—ho!
        An eel-skin sleeve lasht here and there with lace,
        High collar lasht again, breech lasht also,
        A little simpering ruff, a dapper cloak
        With Spanish-button’d cape, my rapier here,
        Gloves like a burgomaster here, hat here
        (Stuck with some ten-groat brooch), and over all
        A goodly long thick Abram-colour’d[639] beard.
        Ho God, ho God! thus did I revel it,
        When Monsieur Motte lay here ambassador.[640]
        But now those beards are gone, our chins are bare;
        Our courtiers now do all against the hair.[641]
        I can lie close and see this, but not see:
        I’m[642] hoary, but not hoary as some be.
          IMP. Heigho! who’s that? Signior Curvetto! by my
        virginity—
          CUR. Hem! no more.
        Swear not so deep at these[643] years: men have eyes,
        And though the most are fools, some fools are wise.
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie: and[644] you meet me thus at half
        weapon, one must down.
          FRIS. She, for my life.                     [_Aside._
          IMP. Somebody shall pay for’t.
          FRIS. He, for my head.                      [_Aside._
          IMP. Do not therefore come over me so with cross blows:
        no, no, no, I shall be sick if my speech be stopt. By my
        virginity I swear,—and why may not I swear by that I
        have not, as well as poor musty soldiers do by their
        honour, brides at four-and-twenty, ha, ha, ha! by their
        maidenheads, citizens by their faith, and brokers as
        they hope to be saved?—by my virginity I swear, I
        dreamed that one brought me a goodly codshead, and in
        one of the eyes there stuck, methought, the greatest
        precious stone, the most sparkling diamond: O, fie, fie,
        fie, fie, fie, that diamonds should make women such
        fools!
          CUR. A codshead and a diamond? ha, ha, ha!
        ’Tis common, common: you may dream as well
        Of diamonds and of codsheads, where’s not one,
        As swear by your virginity, where’s none.—
        I am that codshead; she has spied my stone,
        My diamond: noble wench, but nobler stone;[645]
        I’m[646] an old courtier, and lie close, lie close.
                                       [_Aside, and puts it up._

    [_The cornets sound a lavolta, which the masquers are to
      dance_: CAMILLO, HIPPOLITO, _and other gallants, every
      one, save_ HIPPOLITO,[647] _with a lady masqued, and
      zanies with torches,[648] enter suddenly_: CURVETTO
      _offers to depart_.
          IMP. No, no, no, if you shrink from me, I will not love
        you: stay.
          CUR. I am conjured, and will keep my circle.
                                                  [_They dance._
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, by the neat tongue of eloquence,
        this measure is out of measure; ’tis too hot, too hot.
        Gallants, be not ashamed to shew your own faces. Ladies,
        unapparel your dear beauties. So, so, so, so: here is a
        banquet; sit, sit, sit. Signior Curvetto, thrust in
        among them. Soft music, there! do, do, do.
                           [_Music, while they seat themselves._
          CUR. I will first salute the men, close with the women,
        and last sit.
          HIP. But not sit last: a banquet, and have these
        suckets[649] here! O, I have a crew of angels[650]
        prisoners in my pocket, and none but a good bale[651] of
        dice can fetch them out.—Dice, ho!—Come, my little
        lecherous baboon; by Saint Mark, you shall venture your
        twenty crowns.
          CUR. And have but one.
          HIP. I swore first.
          CUR. Right, you swore;
        But oaths are now, like Blurt our constable,
        Standing for nothing.—A mere plot, a trick:
        The masque dogg’d me, I hit it in the nick;
        A fetch to get my diamond, my dear stone:
        I’m[652] a hoary courtier, but lie close, close, close.—
        I’ll play, sir.                               [_Aside._
          HIP. Come.
          CUR. But in my t’other hose.                     [_Exit._
          OMNES. Curvetto!
          HIP. Let him go: I knew what hook would choke him, and
        therefore baited that for him to nibble upon. An old
        comb-pecked rascal, that was beaten out a’ th’ cock-pit,
        when I could not stand a’ high lone[653] without I held
        by a thing, to come crowing among us! Hang him, lobster.
        Come, the same oath that your foreman took, take all,
        and sing.

                                 SONG.

         _Love is like a lamb, and love is like a lion;
         Fly from love, he fights, fight, then does he fly on;
         Love is all in fire, and yet is ever freezing;
         Love is much in winning, yet is more in leesing;[654]
         Love is ever sick, and yet is never dying;
         Love is ever true, and yet is ever lying;
         Love does doat in liking, and is mad in loathing;
         Love indeed is any thing, yet indeed is nothing._

               _During the song_ LAZARILLO _enters_.[655]

          LAZ. Mars armipotent with his court of guard, give
        sharpness to my toledo! I am beleaguered. O Cupid, grant
        that my blushing prove not a linstock, and give fire too
        suddenly to the Roaring Meg[656] of my desires!—Most
        sanguine-cheeked ladies—
          HIP. ’S foot, how now, Don Diego?[657] sanguine-cheeked?
        dost think their faces have been at cutler’s?[658] out,
        you roaring, tawney-faced rascal! ’Twere a good deed to
        beat my hilts about’s coxcomb, and then make him
        sanguine-cheeked too.
          CAM. Nay, good Hippolito.
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, fie, fie; though I hate his company,
        I would not have my house to abuse his countenance; no,
        no, no, be not so contagious: I will send him hence with
        a flea in’s ear.
          HIP. Do, or I’ll turn him into a flea, and make him skip
        under some of your petticoats.
          IMP. Signior Lazarillo.
          LAZ. Most sweet face, you need not hang out your silken
        tongue as a flag of truce, for I will drop at your feet
        ere I draw blood in your chamber. Yet I shall hardly
        drink up this wrong: for your sake I will wipe it out
        for this time. I would deal with you in secret, so you
        had a void room, about most deep and serious matters.
          IMP. I’ll send these hence.—Fie, fie, fie, I am so
        choked still with this man of gingerbread, and yet I can
        never be rid of him! but hark, Hippolito.
                                          [_Whispers_ HIPPOLITO.
          HIP. Good; draw the curtains, put out candles; and,
        girls, to bed.
                 [_Exeunt all but_ IMPERIA _and_ LAZARILLO.[659]
          LAZ. Venus, give me suck from thine own most white and
        tender dugs, that I may batten in love. Dear instrument
        of many men’s delight, are all these women?
          IMP. No, no, no, they are half men and half women.
          LAZ. You apprehend too fast: I mean by women, wives; for
        wives are no maids, nor are maids women. If those
        unbearded gallants keep the doors of their wedlock,
        those ladies spend their hours of pastime but ill, O
        most rich armful of beauty! But if you can bring all
        those females into one ring, into one private place, I
        will read a lecture of discipline to their most great
        and honourable ears, wherein I will teach them so to
        carry their white bodies, either before their husbands
        or before their lovers, that they shall never fear to
        have milk thrown in their faces, nor I wine in mine,
        when I come to sit upon them in courtesy.
          IMP. That were excellent: I’ll have them all here at
        your pleasure.
          LAZ. I will shew them all the tricks and garbs of
        Spanish dames; I will study for apt and [e]legant phrase
        to tickle them with; and when my devise is ready, I will
        come. Will you inspire into your most divine spirits the
        most divine soul of tobacco?
          IMP. No, no, no; fie, fie, fie, I should be choked up,
        if your pipe should kiss my underlip.
          LAZ. Henceforth, most deep stamp of feminine perfection,
        my pipe shall not be drawn before you but in secret.

  _Re-enter_ HIPPOLITO _and the rest of the Masquers, as before,
    dancing_: HIPPOLITO _takes_ IMPERIA; _and then exeunt all
    except_ LAZARILLO.

          LAZ. Lament my case, since thou canst not provoke
        Her nose to smell, love fill thine own with smoke.[660]
                                                        [_Exit._




                           ACT III. SCENE I.


               _A Street_; _before_ HIPPOLITO’S _House_.

                    _Enter_ HIPPOLITO _and_ FRISCO.

          FRIS. The wooden picture you sent her hath set her on
        fire; and she desires you, as you pity the case of a
        poor desperate gentlewoman, to serve that Monsieur in at
        supper to her.

                   _Enter_ CAMILLO _with Musicians_.

          HIP. The Frenchman? Saint Denis, let her carve him
        up. Stay, here’s Camillo. Now, my fool in fashion, my
        sage idiot, up with these brims,[661] down with this
        devil, Melancholy! Are you decayed, concupiscentious
        innamorato? News, news; Imperia doats on Fontinelle.
          CAM. What comfort speaks her love to my sick
        heart?
          HIP. Marry, this, sir. Here’s a yellow-hammer flew to me
        with thy water; and I cast it, and find that his
        mistress being given to this new falling sickness, will
        cure thee. The Frenchman, you see, has a soft marmalady
        heart, and shall no sooner feel Imperia’s liquorish
        desire to lick at him, but straight he’ll stick the
        brooch of her longing in it. Then, sir, may you, sir,
        come upon my sister, sir, with a fresh charge, sir; sa,
        sa, sa, sa! once giving back, and thrice coming forward;
        she yield, and the town of Brest[662] is taken.
          CAM. This hath some taste of hope. Is that the Mercury
        Who brings you notice of his mistress’ love?
          FRIS. I may be her Mercury, for my running of errands;
        but troth is, sir, I am Cerberus, for I am porter to
        hell.
          CAM. Then, Cerberus, play thy part: here, search that
             hell;
                                             [_Gives him a key._
         There find and bring forth that false Fontinelle.
                   [_Exit_ FRISCO.
        If I can win his stray’d thoughts to retire
        From her encounter’d eyes, whom I have singled
        In Hymen’s holy battle, he shall pass
        From hence to France, in company and guard
        Of mine own heart:—he comes, Hippolito.

               _Enter_ FONTINELLE, _talking with_ FRISCO.

        Still looks he like a lover: poor gentleman,
        Love is the mind’s strong physic, and the pill
        That leaves the heart sick and o’erturns the will.
          FONT. O happy persecution, I embrace thee
        With an unfetter’d soul! So sweet a thing
        Is it to sigh upon the rack of love,
        Where each calamity is groaning witness
        Of the poor martyr’s faith. I never heard
        Of any true affection, but ’twas nipt
        With care, that, like the caterpillar, eats
        The leaves off the spring’s sweetest book, the rose.
        Love bred on earth, is often nurs’d in hell;
        By rote it reads woe, ere it learn to spell.
          CAM. Good morrow, French lord.
          HIP. _Bon jour, Monsieur._
          FONT. To your secure and more than happy self
        I tender thanks, for you have honour’d me.
        You are my jailor, and have penn’d me up,
        Lest the poor fly, your prisoner, should alight
        Upon your mistress’ lip, and thence derive
        The dimpled print of an infective touch.
        Thou secure tyrant, yet unhappy lover,
        Couldst thou chain mountains to my captive feet,
        Yet Violetta’s heart and mine should meet.
          HIP. Hark, swaggerer, there’s a little dapple-coloured
        rascal; ho, a bona-roba;[663] her name’s Imperia; a
        gentlewoman, by my faith, of an ancient house, and has
        goodly rents and comings in of her own; and this ape
        would fain have thee chained to her in the holy state.
        Sirrah, she’s fallen in love with thy picture; yes,
        faith. To her, woo her, and win her; leave my sister,
        and thy ransom’s paid; all’s paid, gentlemen: by th’
        Lord, Imperia is as good a girl as any is in Venice.
          CAM. Upon mine honour, Fontinelle, ’tis true;
        The lady doats on thy perfections:
        Therefore resign my Violetta’s heart
        To me, the lord of it; and I will send thee—
          FONT. O, whither? to damnation, wilt thou not?
        Think’st thou the purity of my true soul
        Can taste your leperous counsel? no, I defy you.
        Incestancy[664] dwell on his rivell’d brow
        That weds for dirt; or on th’ enforced heart
        That lags in rearward of his father’s charge,
        When to some negro-guelderling he’s clogg’d
        By the injunction of a golden fee!
        When I call back my vows to Violetta,
        May I then slip into an obscure grave,
        Whose mould, imprest with stony monument,
        Dwelling in open air, may drink the tears
        Of the inconstant clouds, to rot me soon
        Out of my private linen sepulchre!
          CAM. Ay!
        Is this your settled resolution?
          FONT. By my love’s best divinity, it is.
          CAM. Then bear him to his prison back again.—
        This tune must alter ere thy lodging mend:
        To death, fond[665] Frenchman, thy slight love doth
           tend.
          FONT. Then, constant heart, thy fate with joy pursue;
        Draw wonder to thy death, expiring true.       [_Exit._
          HIP. After him, Frisco; enforce thy mistress’s passion.
        Thou shalt have access to him, to bring him love-tokens:
        if they prevail not, yet thou shalt still be in
        presence, be’t but to spite him. In, honest Frisco.
          FRIS. I’ll vex him to the heart, sir; fear not me.
        Yet here’s a trick perchance may set him free.
                                              [_Aside and exit._
          HIP. Come, wilt thou go laugh and lie down?[666] Now
        sure there be some rebels in thy belly, for thine eyes
        do nothing but watch and ward: thou’st not slept these
        three nights.
          CAM. Alas, how can I? he that truly loves
        Burns out the day in idle fantasies;
        And when the lamb bleating doth bid good night
        Unto the closing day, then tears begin
        To keep quick time unto the owl, whose voice
        Shrieks like the belman[667] in the lover’s ears:
        Love’s eye the jewel of sleep, O, seldom wears!
        The early lark is waken’d from her bed,
        Being only by love’s plaints disquieted,
        And, singing in the morning’s ear, she weeps,
        Being deep in love, at lovers’ broken sleeps:
        But say a golden slumber chance to tie,
        With silken strings, the cover of love’s eye,
        Then dreams, magician-like, mocking present
        Pleasures, whose fading leaves more discontent.
        Have you these golden charms?
          MUS. We have, my lord.
          CAM. Bestow them sweetly; think a lover’s heart
        Dwells in each instrument, and let it melt
        In weeping strains. Yonder direct your faces,
        That the soft summons of a frightless parley
        May creep into the casement. So, begin:
        Music, speak movingly; assume my part;
        For thou must now plead to a stony heart.

                             SONG.
                         _Pity, pity, pity!
                        Pity, pity, pity!
         That word begins that ends a true-love ditty.
             Your blessed eyes, like a pair of suns,
               Shine in the sphere of smiling;
             Your pretty lips, like a pair of doves,
               Are kisses still compiling.
         Mercy hangs upon your brow, like a precious jewel:
                         O, let not then,
           Most lovely maid, best to be lov’d of men,
         Marble lie upon your heart, that will make you cruel!
                         Pity, pity, pity!
                         Pity, pity, pity!
             That word begins that ends a true-love ditty._
                                      [VIOLETTA _appears above_.
          VIOL. Who owes[668] this salutation?
          CAM. Thy Camillo.
          VIOL. Is not your shadow there too, my sweet brother?
          HIP. Here, sweet sister.
          VIOL. I dreamt so. O, I am much bound to you!
        For you, my lord, have us’d my love with honour.
          CAM. Ever with honour.
          VIOL. Indeed, indeed, you have.
          HIP. ’S light, she means her French _garçon_.
          VIOL. The same. Good night; trust me, ’tis somewhat
             late,
        And this bleak wind nips dead all idle prate.
        I must to bed: good night.
          CAM. The god of rest
        Play music to thine eyes! whilst on my breast
        The Furies sit and beat, and keep care waking.
          HIP. You will not leave my friend in this poor taking?
          VIOL. Yes, by the velvet brow of darkness!
          HIP. You scurvy tit,—’s foot, scurvy any thing! Do you
        hear, Susanna? you punk, if I geld not your musk-cat!
        I’ll do’t, by Jesu. Let’s go, Camillo.
          VIOL. Nay but, pure swaggerer, ruffian, do you think
        To fright me with your bugbear threats? go by!
        Hark, toss-pot, in your ear; the Frenchman’s mine,
        And by these hands I’ll have him!
          HIP. Rare rogue, fine!
          VIOL. He is my prisoner, by a deed of gift;
        Therefore, Camillo, you have wrong’d me much
        To wrong my prisoner. By my troth, I love him
        The rather for the baseness he endures
        For my unworthy self. I’ll tell you what;
        Release him, let him plead your love for you;
        I love a’ life[669] to hear a man speak French
        Of his complexion; I would undergo
        The instruction of that language rather far
        Than be two weeks unmarried. By my life,
        Because I’ll speak true French, I’ll be his wife.
          CAM. O, scorn to my chaste love! burst, heart.
          HIP. ’S wounds, hold!
          CAM. Come, gentle friends, tie your most solemn tunes
        By silver strings unto a leaden pace.
        False fair, enjoy thy base belov’d: adieu:
        He’s far less noble, and shall prove less true.
                  [_Exeunt_ CAMILLO, HIPPOLITO, _and Musicians_.

                _Enter_ TRUEPENNY _above with a letter_.

          TRUE. Lady, Imperia the courtesan’s zany[670] hath
        brought you this letter from the poor gentleman in the
        deep dungeon, but would not stay till he had an answer.
          VIOL. Her groom employed by Fontinelle? O, strange!
        I wonder how he got access to him.
        I’ll read, and reading my poor heart shall ache:
        True love is jealous; fears the best love shake.
                                                       [_Reads._
        _Meet me at the end of the old chapel, next Saint
        Lorenzo’s monastery. Furnish your company with a friar,
        that there he may consummate our holy vows. Till
        midnight, farewell._                _Thine_, FONTINELLE.

        Hath he got opportunity to ’scape?
        O happy period of our separation!
        Blest night, wrap Cynthia in a sable sheet,
        That fearful lovers may securely meet!        [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                  _Before Saint Lorenzo’s Monastery._

          _Enter_ FRISCO _in_ FONTINELLE’s _apparel, and_
              FONTINELLE _making himself ready[671] in_
              FRISCO’s: _they enter suddenly and in fear_.

          FRIS. Play you my part bravely; you must look like a
        slave: and you shall see I’ll counterfeit the Frenchman
        most knavishly. My mistress, for your sake, charged me
        on her blessing to fall to these shifts. I left her at
        cards: she’ll sit up till you come, because she’ll have
        you play a game at noddy.[672] You’ll to her presently?
          FONT. I will, upon mine honour.
          FRIS. I think she does not greatly care whether you fall
        to her upon your honour or no. So, all’s fit. Tell my
        lady that I go in a suit of durance for her sake. That’s
        your way, and this pit-hole’s mine. If I can ’scape
        hence, why so; if not, he that’s hanged is nearer to
        heaven by half a score steps than he that dies in a bed:
        and so adieu, monsieur.                        [_Exit._

          FONT. Farewell, dear trusty slave. Shall I profane
        This temple with an idol of strange love?
        When I do so, let me dissolve in fire.
        Yet one day will I see this dame, whose heart
        Takes off my misery: I’ll not be so rude
        To pay her kindness with ingratitude.

                 _Enter_ VIOLETTA _and a Friar apace_.

          VIOL. My dearest Fontinelle!
          FONT. My Violetta!
        O God!
          VIOL. O God!
          FONT. Where is this reverend friar?
          FRIAR. Here, overjoy’d young man.
          VIOL. How didst thou ’scape?
        How came Imperia’s man——
          FONT. No more of that.
          VIOL. When did Imperia——
          FONT. Questions now are thieves,
        And lie[673] in ambush to surprise our joys.
        [O] my most happy stars, shine still, shine on!
        Away, come: love beset had need be gone.     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                     _A Room in_ IMPERIA’s _House_.

                   _Enter_ CURVETTO _and_ SIMPERINA.

          CUR. I must not stay, thou sayst?
          SIM. God’s me, away!
          CUR. Buss, buss again;—here’s sixpence;—buss again,—
        Farewell: I must not stay then?
          SIM. Foh!
          CUR. Farewell:
        At ten a’ clock[674] thou sayst, and ring a bell,
        Which thou wilt hang out at this window?
          SIM. Lord!
        She’ll hear this fiddling.
          CUR. No, close, on my word.
        Farewell: just ten a’ clock; I shall come in?
        Remember to let down the cord,—just ten:
        Thou’lt open, mouse? pray God thou dost. Amen![675]
        I’m[676] an old courtier, wench, but I can spy
        A young duck: close, mum; ten; close, ’tis not I.
                                                        [_Exit._
          SIM. Mistress, sweet ladies!

          _Enter_ IMPERIA _and Ladies with table-books_.[677]

          IMP. Is his old rotten aqua-vitæ bottle stopt up? is he
        gone? Fie, fie, fie, fie, he so smells of ale and
        onions, and rosa-solis, fie. Bolt the door, stop the
        keyhole, lest his breath peep in. Burn some perfume. I
        do not love to handle these dried stockfishes, that ask
        so much tawing:[678] fie, fie, fie.
          FIRST LADY. Nor I, trust me, lady; fie.
          IMP. No, no, no, no. Stools and cushions; low stools,
        low stools; sit, sit, sit, round, ladies, round.
        [_They seat themselves._] So, so, so, so; let your
        sweet beauties be spread to the full and most moving
        advantage; for we are fallen into his hands, who, they
        say, has an A B C for the sticking in of the least
        white pin in any part of the body.
          SECOND LADY. Madam Imperia, what stuff is he like to
        draw out before us?
          IMP. Nay, nay, nay, ’tis Greek to me, ’tis Greek to me:
        I never had remnant of his Spanish-leather learning.
        Here he comes: your ears may now fit themselves out of
        the whole piece.

                        _Enter_ LAZARILLO.[679]

          LAZ. I do first deliver to your most skreet[680] and
        long-fingered hands this head, or top of all the
        members, bare and uncombed, to shew how deeply I stand
        in reverence of your naked female beauties. Bright and
        unclipt angels,[681] if I were to make a discovery of
        any new-found land, as Virginia or so, to ladies and
        courtiers, my speech should hoist up sails fit to bear
        up such lofty and well-rigged vessels: but because I am
        to deal only with the civil chitty-matron,[682] I will
        not lay upon your blushing and delicate cheek[s] any
        other colours than such as will give lustre to your
        chitty[683] faces: in and to that purpose, our thesis is
        taken out of that most plentiful, but most precious
        book, entitled the _Economical Cornucopia_.
          FIRST LADY. The what?
          LAZ. The _Economical Cornucopia_: thus,
        _Wise is that wife, who with apt wit complains
        That she’s kept under, yet rules all the reins._
          SECOND LADY. O, again, sweet signior!—[_writing_]
                                   ———_complains
        That she’s kept under_——
        What follows?
          LAZ. _Yet rules all the reins:
        Wise is that wife, who with apt wit complains
        That she’s kept under, yet rules all the reins._
         Most pure and refined plants of nature, I will not,
        as this distinction enticeth, take up the parts as
        they lie here in order; as first, to touch your
        _wisdom_, it were folly; next, your _complaining_,
        ’tis too common; thirdly, your _keeping under_, ’tis
        above my capachity;[684] and, lastly, _the reins in
        your own hands_, that is the a-per-se[685] of all, the
        very cream of all, and therefore how to skim off that
        only, only listen: a wife wise, no matter; apt wit, no
        matter; complaining, no matter; kept under, no great
        matter; but to rule the roast is the matter.
          THIRD LADY. That ruling of the roast goes with me.
          FOURTH LADY. And me.
          FIFTH LADY. And me; I’ll have a cut of that roast.
          LAZ. Since, then, a woman’s only desire is to have the
        reins in her own white hand, your chief practice, the
        very same day that you are wived, must be to get hold of
        these reins; and being fully gotten, or wound about,
        _yet to complain, with apt wit, as though you had them
        not_.
          IMP. How shall we know, signior, when we have them all
        or not?
          LAZ. I will furnish your capable understandings out of
        my poor Spanish store with the chief implements, and
        their appurtenances. Observe; it shall be your first and
        finest praise to sing the note of every new fashion at
        first sight, and, if you can, to stretch that note above
        ela.[686]
          OMNES. Good.
          LAZ. The more you pinch your servants’ bellies for this,
        the smoother will the fashion sit on your back: but if
        your goodman like not this music, as being too full of
        crotchets, your only way is, to learn to play upon the
        virginals,[687] and so nail his ears to your sweet
        humours. If this be out of time too, yet your labour
        will quit the cost; for by this means your secret friend
        may have free and open access to you, under the colour
        of pricking you lessons. Now, because you may tie your
        husband’s love in most sweet knots, you shall never give
        over labouring till out of his purse you have digged _a
        garden_;[688] and that garden must stand a pretty
        distance from the chitty;[689] for by repairing thither,
        much good fruit may be grafted.
          FIRST LADY. Mark that.
          LAZ. Then, in the afternoon, when you address your sweet
        perfumed body to walk to this garden, there to gather a
        nosegay,—sops-in-wine,[690] cowslips, columbines,
        heart’s-ease, &c.,—the first principle to learn is, that
        you stick black patches for the rheum on your delicate
        blue temples, though there be no room for the rheum:
        black patches are comely in most women, and being well
        fastened, draw men’s eyes to shoot glances at you. Next,
        your ruff must stand in print;[691] and for that
        purpose, get poking-sticks[692] with fair and long
        handles, lest they scorch your lily sweating hands. Then
        your hat with a little brim, if you have a little face;
        if otherwise, otherwise. Besides, you must play the wag
        with your wanton fan; have your dog,—called Pearl, or
        Min, or Why ask you, or any other pretty name,—dance
        along by you; your embroidered muff before you, on your
        ravishing hands; but take heed who thrusts his fingers
        into your fur.
          SECOND LADY. We’ll watch for that.
          LAZ. Once a quarter take state upon you, and be
        chick.[693] Being chick thus politicly, lie at your
        garden: your lip-sworn servant may there visit you as a
        physician; where[694] otherwise, if you languish at
        home, be sure your husband will look to your water. This
        chickness[695] may be increased, with giving out that
        you breed young bones; and to stick flesh upon those
        bones, it shall not be amiss if you long for peascods at
        ten groats the cod, and for cherries at a crown the
        cherry.
          FIRST LADY. O dear tutor!
          SECOND LADY. Interrupt him not.
          LAZ. If, while this pleasing fit of chickness hold you,
        you be invited forth to supper, whimper and seem
        unwilling to go; but if your goodman, bestowing the
        sweet duck and kiss upon your moist lip, entreat, go.
        Marry, my counsel is, you eat little at table, because
        it may be said of you, you are no cormorant; yet at your
        coming home you may counterfeit a qualm, and so devour a
        posset. Your husband need not have his nose in that
        posset; no, trust your chambermaid only in this, and
        scarcely her; for you cannot be too careful into whose
        hands you commit your secrets.
          OMNES. That’s certain.
          LAZ. If you have daughters capable, marry them by no
        means to chittizens,[696] but choose for them some
        smooth-chinned, curled-headed gentlemen;[697] for
        gentlemen will lift up your daughters to their own
        content; and to make these curled-pated gallants come
        off the more roundly, make your husband go to the herald
        for arms; and let it be your daily care that he have a
        fair and comely crest; yea, go all the ways yourselves
        you can to be made ladies, especially if, without danger
        to his person, or for love or money, you can procure
        your husband to be dubbed. The goddess of memory lock up
        these jewels, which I have bestowed upon you, in your
        sweet brains! Let these be the rules to square out your
        life by, though you ne’er go level, but tread you[r]
        shoes awry. If you can get these reins into your lily
        hand[s], you shall need no coaches, but may drive your
        husbands. Put it down; and, according to that wise
        saying of you, be saints in the church, angels in the
        street, devils in the kitchen, and apes in your bed:
        upon which leaving you tumbling, pardon me that thus
        abruptly and openly I take you all up.
          FIRST LADY. You have got so far into our books, signior,
        that you cannot ’scape without a pardon here, if you
        take us up never so snappishly.
          IMP. Music there, to close our stomachs! How do you like
        him, madonna?
                                                       [_Music._
          SECOND LADY. O, trust me, I like him most profoundly!
        why, he’s able to put down twenty such as I am.
          THIRD LADY. Let them build upon that; nay, more, we’ll
        henceforth never go to a cunning woman, since men can
        teach us our lerry.[698]
          FOURTH LADY. We are all fools to him; and our husbands,
        if we can hold these reins fast, shall be fools to us.
          SECOND LADY. If we can keep but this bias, wenches, our
        goodmen may perchance once in a month get a fore-game of
        us; but, if they win a rubbers, let them throw their
        caps at it.
          IMP. No, no, no, dear features, hold their noses to the
        grindstone, and they’re gone. Thanks, worthy signior:
        fie, fie, fie, you stand bare too long. Come, bright
        mirrors, will you withdraw into a gallery, and taste a
        slight banquet?
          FIRST LADY. We shall cloy ourselves with sweets, my
        sweet madonna.
          SECOND LADY. Troth, I will not, madonna Imperia.
          IMP. No, no, no. Fie, fie, fie, signior Lazarillo,
        either be you our foreman, or else put in these ladies,
        at your discretion, into the gallery, and cut off this
        striving.
          LAZ. It shall be my office; my fees being, as they pass,
        to take toll of their alablaster[699] hands. [_Exeunt
        Ladies_: IMPERIA _stays_.] Admired creature, I summon
        you to a parley: you remember this is the night?
          IMP. So, so, so, I do remember: here is a key; that is
        your chamber.—Lights, Simperina.—About twelve a’ clock
        you shall take my beauty prisoner:—fie, fie, fie, how I
        blush!—at twelve a’ clock.
          LAZ. Rich argosy of all golden pleasure—
          IMP. No, no, no, put up, put up your joys till anon: I
        will come, by my virginity. But I must tell you one
        thing, that all my chambers are many nights haunted,
        with what sprites none can see; but sometimes we hear
        birds singing, sometimes music playing, sometimes voices
        laughing: but stir not you, nor be frighted at any
        thing.
          LAZ. By Hercules, if any spirits rise, I will conjure
        them in their own circles with toledo.
          IMP. So, so, so; lights for his chamber.—Is the trap-
        door ready?
                                                       [_Aside._
          SIMP. ’Tis set sure.
          IMP. So, so, so, I will be rid of this broiled red
        sprat, that stinks so in my stomach, fie; I hate him
        worse than to have a tailor come a-wooing to me.
        [_Aside._] God’s me! the sweet ladies, the banquet,—I
        forget: fie, fie, fie, follow, dear signior.—The trap-
        door, Simperina.
                                             [_Aside, and exit._
          SIMP. Signior, come away.
          LAZ. Cupid, I kiss the nock[700] of thy sweet bow: A
        woman makes me yield; Mars could not so.
                                         [_Exit with_ SIMPERINA.




                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


        _A Street; before_ IMPERIA’s _House; a cord hanging from
                              the window_.

                  _Enter_ CURVETTO, _with a lantern_.

          CUR. Just ten? ’tis ten just: that’s the fixed hour
        For payment of my love’s due fees; that broke,
        I forfeit a huge sum of joys: ho, love,
        I’ll keep time just to a minute, I;
        A sweet guide’s[701] loss is a deep penalty:
        A night’s so rich aventure[702] to taste wrack,[703]
        Would make a lover bankrupt, break his back.
        No, if to sit up late, early to rise,
        Or if this goldfinch,[704] that with sweet notes flies,
        And wakes the dull eye even of a puritan,
        Can work, then, wenches, Curvetto is the man.
        I am not young, yet have I youthful tricks,
        Which peering day must not see; no, close, close,
        Old courtier, perilous[705] fellow, I can lie;
        Hug in your bosom, close, yet none shall spy.
        Stay, here’s the door, the window; hah, this, this!
        Cord?—umph!—dear cord, thy blessed knot I kiss.
        None peeps, I hope. Night, clap thy velvet hand
        Upon all eyes! if now my friend thou stand,
        I’ll hang a jewel at thine ear, sweet night;
        And here it is, lantern and candle-light.[706]
        A peal, a lusty peal, set, ring love’s knell
        I’ll sweat, but thus I’ll bear away the bell.
           [_Pulls the cord hanging from the window, and is
              drenched with water._

                       _Enter_ SIMPERINA _above_.

          SIM. Signior,—who’s there? signior Curvetto?
          CUR. Umph, drown’d! Noah’s flood! duck’d over head and
             ears!
        O sconce, and O sconce![707] an old soaker, O!
        I sweat now till I drop: what, villains, O!
        Punks, punkateroes, nags, hags! I will ban:[708]
        I’ve[709] catch’d my bane.
          SIM. Who’s there?
          CUR. A water-man.
          SIM. Who rings that scolding peal?
          CUR. I am wringing wet,
        I’m[710] wash’d: foh, here’s rose-water sold by th’
           ounce!
        This sconce shall batter down those windows—bounce!
          SIM. What do you mean? why do you beat our doors?
        What do you take us for?
          CUR. You’re all damn’d whores.
          SIM. Signior Curvetto!
          CUR. Signior coxcomb, no.
          SIM. What makes you be so hot?
          CUR. You lie, I’m[711] cool;
        I’m an old courtier, but stinking fool.
        Foh!
          SIM. God’s my life! what have you done? you are in a
        sweet pickle if you pulled at this rope.
          CUR. Hang thyself in’t, and I’ll pull once again.
          SIM. Marry muff,[712] will you up and ride? you’re mine
        elder. By my pure maidenhead, here’s a jest! why, this
        was a water-work to drown a rat that uses to creep in at
        this window.
          CUR. Fire on your water-works! catch a drown’d rat?
        That’s me, I have it, God a-mercy, head!
        Rat? me; I smell a rat, I strike it dead.
          SIM. You smell a sodden sheep’s-head: a rat? ay, a rat:
        and[713] you will not believe me, marry, foh! I have
        been believed of your betters, marry, snick up!
          CUR. Simp, nay, sweet Simp, open again; why, Simperina!
          SIM. Go from my window, go, go from, &c.,[714] away; go
        by, old Jeronimo:[715] nay, and[716] you shrink i’ th’
        wetting, walk, walk, walk.
          CUR. I cry thee mercy; if the bowl were set
        To drown a rat, I shrink not, am not wet.
          SIM. A rat by this hemp, and[717] you could ha’ smelt.
        Hark you; here’s the bell, ting, ting, ting: would the
        clapper were in my belly, if I am not mad at your
        foppery; I could scratch, fie, fie, fie, fie, fie, as my
        mistress says. But go, hie you home, shift you, come
        back presently: here you shall find a ladder of cords;
        climb up; I’ll receive you: my mistress lies alone;
        she’s yours: away.
          CUR. O Simp!
          SIM. Nay, scud: you know what you promised me: I shall
        have simple yawling for this: begone, and mum.[718]
          CUR. Thanks, mum, dear girl; I’m gone: ’twas for a
             rat,
        A rat upon my life: thou shalt have gifts;
        I love thee, though thou puts[t] me to my shifts.
        I knew[719] I could be over-reach’d by none;
        A parlous[720] head! lie close, lie close: I’m[721]
           gone.                           [_Exeunt severally._


                               SCENE II.


                     _A Room in_ IMPERIA’s _House_.

      _Music suddenly plays and birds sing: enter_ LAZARILLO
          _bareheaded, in his shirt, a pair of pantaples[722]
          on, a rapier in his hand and a tobacco-pipe: he seems
          amazed, and walks so up and down_.[723]

          LAZ. Saint Jacques and the Seven deadly Sins (that is,
        the Seven Wise Masters of the world), pardon me, for
        this night I will kill the devil!
          [_Within._] Ha, ha, ha!
          LAZ. Thou prince of blackamoors, thou shalt have small
        cause to laugh, if I run thee through. This chamber is
        haunted: would I had not been brought a’ bed in it, or
        else were well delivered! for my heart tells me ’tis no
        good luck to have any thing to do with the devil; he’s a
        paltry merchant.

                            [_Song within._]

        _Midnight’s bell goes ting, ting, ting, ting, ting;
        Then dogs do howl; and not a bird does sing
        But the nightingale, and she cries twit, twit, twit,
           twit;
        Owls then on every bough do sit;
        Ravens croak on chimneys’ tops;
        The cricket in the chamber hops;
        And the cats cry mew, mew, mew;
        The nibbling mouse is not asleep,
        But he goes peep, peep, peep, peep, peep;_
        _And the cats cry[724] mew, mew, mew,
        And still the cats cry mew, mew, mew._
          LAZ. I shall be moused by puss-cats, but I had rather
        die a dog’s death: they have nine lives a piece (like a
        woman), and they will make it up ten lives, if they and
        I fall a-scratching. Bright Helena of this house, would
        thy Troy were a-fire, for I am a-cold; or else would I
        had the Greeks’ wooden curtal[725] to ride away. Most
        ambrosian-lipped creature, come away quickly, for this
        night’s lodging lies cold at my heart. [_The Spanish
        pavin[726] played within._] The Spanish pavin? I thought
        the devil could not understand Spanish: but since thou
        art my countryman, O thou tawny Satan,[727] I will dance
        after thy pipe. [_He dances the Spanish pavin._]
        Ho,[728] sweet devil, ho! thou wilt make any man weary
        of thee, though he deal with thee in his shirt. Sweet
        beauty! she’ll not come: I’ll fall to sleep, And dream
        of her; love-dreams are ne’er too deep.
                     [_Lies down and falls through a trap-door._

                    _Enter_ FRISCO _above laughing_.

          FRIS. Ha, ha, ha!
          LAZ. Ho, ho, Frisco, madonna! I am in hell, but here is
        no fire; hell-fire is all put out. What ho, so ho, ho! I
        shall be drowned. I beseech thee, dear Frisco, raise
        Blurt the constable, or some scavenger, to come and make
        clean these kennels of hell; for they stink so, that I
        shall cast[729] away my precious self.

                        _Enter_ IMPERIA _above_.

          IMP. Is he down, Frisco?
          FRIS. He’s down: he cries out he’s in hell; it’s heaven
        to me to have him cry so.
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie, let him lie, and get all to bed.
                  [_Exit._
          FRIS. Not all; I’ve[730] fatting knavery in hand.
        He cries he’s damn’d in hell: the next shall cry
        He’s climbing up to heaven; and here’s the gin:[731]
        One woodcock’s ta’en; I’ll have his brother in.
                            [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


         _A Street; before_ IMPERIA’s _House; a ladder of ropes
                       hanging from the window_.

                   _Enter_ CURVETTO _with a lantern_.

          CUR. Brisk as a capering tailor! I was wash’d,
        But did they shave me? no, I am too wise;
        Lie close i’ th’ bosom of their knaveries;
        I’m[732] an old hoary courtier, and strike dead;
        I hit my marks: ware, ware, a perilous[733] head!
        Cast,[734]—I must find a ladder made of ropes;

         _Enter_ BLURT, SLUBBER, WOODCOCK, _and the rest of the
                                Watch_.

        Ladder and rope; what follow? hanging; ay;
        But where? ah ha, there does the riddle lie.
        I have ’scap’d drowning; but, but, but, I hope
        I shall not ’scape the ladder and the rope.
          WOOD. Yonder’s a light, master constable.
          BLURT. Peace, Woodcock, the sconce[735] approaches.
          CUR. Whew!
          BLURT. Ay, whistling?—Slubber, jog the watch, and give
        the lantern a flap.
          CUR. Whew! Simp, Simperina!

                        _Enter_ FRISCO _above_.

          FRIS. Who’s there?
          CUR. Who’s there?
          FRIS. Signior Curvetto? here’s the ladder; I watch to do
        you a good turn: I am Frisco. Is not Blurt abroad and
        his bill-men?[736]
          CUR. No matter if they be; I hear none nigh;
        I will snug close; out goes my candle’s eye;
        My sconce takes this in snuff;[737] all’s one; I care
           not.
          FRIS. Why, when?[738]
          CUR. I come; close, close; hold, rope, and spare not.
                                 [_Begins to ascend the ladder._
          SLUB. Now the candle’s out.
          BLURT. Peace!
          CUR. Frisco, light, light! my foot is slipt; call
             help.
          FRIS. Help, help, help! thieves, thieves! help, thieves,
        &c.[739]
          BLURT. Thieves? where? Follow close. Slubber, the
        lantern.—Hold, I charge you, in the duke’s name, stand:
        sirrah, you’re like to hang for this.—Down with him.
                                   [_They take_ CURVETTO _down_.
          FRIS. Master Blurt, master constable, here’s his ladder:
        he comes to rob my mistress. I have been scared out of
        my wits above seven times by him, and it’s forty to one
        if ever they come in again. I lay felony to his charge.
          CUR. Felony? you cony-catching[740] slave.
          FRIS. Cony-catching will bear an action. I’ll cony-catch
        you for this.—If I can find our key, I will aid you,
        Master Blurt: if not, look to him, as you will answer it
        upon your deathbed.
          BLURT. What are you?
          CUR. A Venetian gentleman.—Woodcock, how dost thou,
        Woodcock?[741]
          WOOD. Thank your worship.
          BLURT. Woodcock, you are of our side[742] now, and
        therefore your acquaintance cannot serve. And[743] you
        were a gentleman of velvet, I would commit you.
          CUR. Why, what are you, sir?
          BLURT. What am I, sir? do not you know this staff? I am,
        sir, the duke’s own image: at this time the duke’s
        tongue (for fault of a better) lies in my mouth; I am
        constable, sir.
          CUR. Constable, and commit me? marry, Blurt master-
        constable.
          BLURT. Away with him!                  [_He strives._
          OMNES. It’s folly to strive.
          BLURT. I say, away with him.—I’ll Blurt you; I’ll teach
        you to stand covered to authority: your hoary head shall
        be knocked when this staff is in place.
          CUR. Ay, but, master-constable——
          BLURT. No, pardon me, you abuse the duke in me, that am
        his cipher.—I say, away with him; Gulch, away with him;
        Woodcock, keep you with me. I will be known for more
        than Blurt.
           [_Exit, the rest of the Watch carrying off_ CURVETTO.

                           _Enter_ LAZARILLO.

          LAZ. Thou honest fellow, the man in the moon, I beseech
        thee set fire on thy bush of thorns, to light and warm
        me, for I am dung-wet. I fell like Lucifer, I think,
        into hell, and am crawled out, but in worse pickle than
        my lean Pilcher.[744] Hereabout is the hothouse of my
        love. Ho, ho! why ho, there!
          FRIS. Who’s that? What devil stands hohing at my door so
        late?
          LAZ. I beseech thee, Frisco, take in Lazarillo’s ghost.
          FRIS. Lazarillo’s ghost? haunt me not, I charge thee; I
        know thee not: I am in a dream of a dry summer,
        therefore appear not to me.
          LAZ. Is not this the mansion of the cherry-lipped
        madonna Imperia?
          FRIS. Yes; how then? You fly-blown rascal, what art
        thou?
          LAZ. Lazarillo de Tormes: sweet blood, I have a poor
        Spanish suit[745] depending in your house; let me enter,
        most precious Frisco; the mistress of this mansion is my
        beautiful hostess.
          FRIS. How, you turpentine pill, my wife your hostess?
        away, you Spanish vermin!
          LAZ. I beseech thee, most pitiful Frisco, allow my
        lamentation.
          FRIS. And[746] you lament here, I’ll stone you with
        brickbats: I am asleep.
          LAZ. My slop[747] and mandillion[748] lie at thy mercy,
        fine Frisco; I beseech thee, let not my case be thine: I
        must and will lament.
          FRIS. Must you? I’ll wash off your tears; away, you
        hog’s-face!
                      [_Drenches him with foul water, and exit._
          LAZ. Thou hast soused my poor hog’s-face. O Frisco, thou
        art a scurvy doctor, to cast my water no better! it is
        most rammish urine: Mars shall not save thee; I will
        make a brown toast of thy heart, and drink it in a pot
        of thy strong blood.

                  _Enter_ BLURT _and all his Watch_.'

          BLURT. Such fellows must be taken down. Stand. What
        white thing is yonder?
          SLUB. Who goes there? come before the constable.
          LAZ. My dear host Blurt!
          BLURT. You have Blurted fair: I am by my office to
        examine you, where you have spent these two nights.
          LAZ. Most big Blurt, I answer thy great authority, that
        I have been in hell, and am scratched to death with
        puss-cats.
          BLURT. Do you run a’ th’ score at an officer’s house,
        and then run above twelve score off?
          LAZ. I did not run, my sweet-faced Blurt: the Spanish
        fleet is bringing gold enough to discharge all from the
        Indies: lodge me, most pitiful bill-man.[749]
          BLURT. Marry, and will. I am, in the duke’s name, to
        charge you with despicious of felony; and burglary is
        committed this night; and we are to reprehend any that
        we think to be faulty. Were not you at madonna freckle-
        face’s house?
          LAZ. _Signior, si._
          BLURT. Away with him, clap him up.
          LAZ. Most thundering Blurt, do not clap me; most
        thundering[750] Blurt, do not clap me.
          BLURT. Master Lazarus, I know you are a sore fellow
        where you take, and therefore I charge you, in the
        duke’s name, to go without wrasling, though you be in
        your shirt.
          LAZ. Commendable Blurt——
          BLURT. The end of my commendations is to commit you.
          LAZ. I am kin to Don Diego,[751] the Spanish
        adelantado.[752]
          BLURT. If you be kin to Don Diego that was smelt out
        in Paul’s,[753] you pack; your lantedoes nor your
        lanteeroes cannot serve your turn. I charge you, let
        me commit you to the tuition——
          LAZ. Worshipful Blurt, do not commit me into the hands
        of dogs.
          OMNES. Dogs!
          BLURT. Master Lazarus, there’s not a dog shall bite you:
        these are true bill-men,[754] that fight under the
        commonwealth’s flag.
          LAZ. Blurt——
          BLURT. Blurt me no Blurts; I’ll teach all Spaniards how
        to meddle with whores.
          LAZ. Most cunning constable, all Spaniards know that
        already; I have meddled with none.
          BLURT. Your being in your shirt bewrays[755] you.
          LAZ. I beseech thee, most honest Blurt, let not my shirt
        bewray me.
          BLURT. I say, away with him. [_Music._] Music? that’s in
        the courtesan’s; they are about some ungodly act; but
        I’ll play a part in’t ere morning. Away with Lazarus.
          OMNES. Come, Spaniard.
          LAZ. Thy kites and thee for this shall watch in dirt,
        To feed on carrion.
          BLURT. Hence, ptrooh!
          LAZ. O base Blurt!




                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                     _A Room in_ CAMILLO’s _House_.

        _Enter_ CAMILLO, HIPPOLITO, VIRGILIO, ASORINO, BAPTISTA,
            BENTIVOGLIO, DOYT, _and_ DANDYPRAT, _all weaponed,
            their rapiers’ sheaths[756] in their hands_.

          CAM. Gentlemen and noble Italians, whom I love best,
        who know best what wrongs I have stood under, being
        laid on by him who is to thank me for his life: I did
        bestow him, as the prize of mine honour, upon my love,
        the most fair Violetta: my love’s merit was basely
        sold to him by the most false Violetta. Not content
        with this felony, he hath dared to add the sweet theft
        of ignoble marriage: she’s now none’s but his; and he,
        treacherous villain, any one’s but hers: he doats, my
        honoured friends, on a painted courtesan; and, in
        scorn of our Italian laws, our family, our revenge,
        loathes Violetta’s bed, for a harlot’s bosom. I
        conjure you, therefore, by all the bonds of gentility,
        that as you have solemnly sworn a most sharp, so let
        the revenge be most sudden.
          VIR. Be not yourself a bar to that suddenness by this
        protraction.
          OMNES. Away, gentlemen, away then!
          HIP. As for that light hobbyhorse, my sister, whose foul
        name I will rase out with my poniard, by the honour of
        my family, which her lust hath profaned, I swear—and,
        gentlemen, be in this my sworn brothers—I swear, that as
        all Venice does admire her beauty, so all the world
        shall be amazed at her punishment. Follow, therefore.
          VIR. Stay, let our resolutions keep together: whither go
        we first?
          CAM. To the strumpet Imperia’s.
          OMNES. Agreed: what then?
          CAM. There to find Fontinelle: found, to kill him——
          VIR. And killed, to hang out his reeking body at his
        harlot’s window.
          CAM. And by his body, the strumpet’s——
          HIP. And between both, my sister’s.
          VIR. The tragedy is just: on then, begin.
          CAM. As you go, every hand pull in a friend, to
        strengthen us against all opposites. He that has any
        drop of true Italian blood in him, thus vow, this
        morning, to shed others’, or let out his own. If you
        consent to this, follow me.
          OMNES. _Via_,[757] away! the treacherous Frenchman
             dies.
          HIP. Catso,[758] Saint Mark, my pistol! thus death
             flies.                                  [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                     _A Room in_ IMPERIA’s _House_.

            _Enter_ FONTINELLE _and_ IMPERIA, _arm in arm_.

          IMP. Ah, you little effeminate sweet chevalier, why
        dost thou not get a loose periwig of hair on the chin,
        to set thy French face off? By the panting pulse of
        Venus, thou art welcome a thousand degrees beyond the
        reach of arithmetic. Good, good, good; your lip is moist
        and moving; it hath the truest French close, even like
        Mapew,[759] la, la, la, &c.
          FONT. Dear lady! O life of love, what sweetness dwells
        In love’s variety! The soul that plods
        In one harsh book of beauty, but repeats
        The stale and tedious learning, that hath oft
        Faded the senses; when, in reading more,
        We glide in new sweets, and are starv’d with store.
        Now, by the heart of love, my Violet
        Is a foul weed, (O pure Italian flower!)
        She[760] a black negro, to the white compare
        Of this unequall’d beauty? O most accurst,
        That I have given her leave to challenge me!
        But, lady, poison speaks Italian well,
        And in a loath’d kiss I’ll include her hell.
          IMP. So, so, so; do, do, do. Come, come, come, will you
        condemn the mute rushes[761] to be pressed to death by
        your sweet body? Down, down, down; here, here, here;
        lean your head upon the lap of my gown; good, good,
        good. O Saint Mark! here is a love-mark able to wear
        more ladies’ eyes for jewels than—O, lie still, lie
        still! I will level a true Venetian kiss over your right
        shoulder.
          FONT. Shoot home, fair mistress, and as that kiss
             flies
        From lip to lip, wound me with your sharp eyes.
          IMP. No, no, no, I’ll beat this cherry-tree thus, and
        thus, and thus, and[762] you name wound. [_Kisses
        him._
          FONT. I will offend so, to be beaten still.
          IMP. Do, do, do; and if you make any more such lips when
        I beat you, by my virginity, you shall buss this rod.
        Music, I pray thee be not a puritan; sister to the rest
        of the sciences, I knew the time when thou couldst abide
        handling. [_Loud music._] O fie, fie, fie, forbear! thou
        art like a puny barber, new come to the trade; thou
        pickst[763] our ears too deep. So, so, so; will my sweet
        prisoner entertain a poor Italian song?
          FONT. O most willingly, my dear madonna!
          IMP. I care not if I persuade my bad voice to wrestle
        with this music, and catch a strain: so, so, so: keep
        time, keep time, keep time.    [_Sings._
               _Love for such a cherry lip
                Would be glad to pawn his arrows;
              Venus here to take a sip
                Would sell her doves and team of sparrows.
                    But they shall not so;
                      Hey nonny, nonny no!
                    None but I this lip must owe;[764]
                      Hey nonny, nonny no!_
          FONT. Your voice does teach the music.
          IMP. No, no, no.
          FONT. Again, dear love.
          IMP. Hey nonny, nonny no!
              _Did Jove see this wanton eye,
               Ganymede must wait no longer;
             Did Phœbe here one night lie,[765]
               Would change her face and look much younger.
                   But they shall not so;
                     Hey nonny, nonny no!
                   None but I this lip must owe;
                     Hey nonny, nonny no!_

          _Enter_ FRISCO, TRIVIA, _and_ SIMPERINA, _running_.

          FRIS. O madonna!
          TRIV. Mistress!
          SIM. Madonna!
          FRIS. Case up this gentleman: there’s rapping at door;
        and one, in a small voice, says there’s Camillo and
        Hippolito.
          SIM. And they will come in.
          FONT. Upon their deaths they shall, for they seek
             mine.
          IMP. No, no, no: lock the doors fast; Trivia, Simperina,
        stir.
          TRIV. _and_ SIM. Alas!
          FONT. Come they in shape of devils, this angel by,
        I’m[766] arm’d; let them come in; ud’s foot, they die.
          IMP. Fie, fie, fie; I will not have thy white body——
          VIOL. [_within_] What ho, madonna! [_Knocking within._
          IMP. O hark! Not hurt for the Rialto! go, go, go, put
        up;[767] by my virginity, you shall put up.
          VIOL. [_within_] Here are Camillo and Hippolito.
          IMP. Into that little room; you are there as safe as in
        France or the Low Countries.
          FONT. O God!                                 [_Exit._
          IMP. So, so, so; let them enter. Trivia, Simperina,
        smooth my gown, tread down the rushes;[768] let them
        enter; do, do, do. [_Exit_ FRISCO.]—No words, pretty
        darling.—La, la, la, hey nonny, nonny no!   [_Singing._

                   _Re-enter_ FRISCO _with_ VIOLETTA.

          FRIS. Are two men transformed into one woman?
          IMP. How now? what motion’s this?[769]
          VIOL. By your leave, sweet beauty, pardon my excuse,
        which, under the mask of Camillo’s and my brother’s
        names, sought entrance into this house. Good sweetness,
        have you not a property here improper to your house, my
        husband?
          IMP. Hah! your husband here?
          VIOL. Nay, be as you seem to be, white dove, without
        gall.
          IMP. Gall? your husband? ha, ha, ha! by my ventoy,[770]
        yellow[771] lady, you take your mark improper; no, no,
        no, my sugar-candy mistress, your goodman is not here, I
        assure you: here? ha, ha!
          TRIV. _and_ SIM. Here?
          FRIS. Much husbands here![772]
          VIOL. Do not mock me, fairest Venetian; come, I know
        he’s here. Good faith, I do not blame him; for your
        beauty gilds[773] over his error. Troth, I am right glad
        that you, my countrywoman, have received the pawn of my
        affections: you cannot be hard-hearted, loving him; nor
        hate me, for I love him too. Since we both love him, let
        us not leave him, till we have called home the ill
        husbandry of a sweet straggler. Prithee, good wench, use
        him well.
          IMP. So, so, so!
          VIOL. If he deserve not to be used well (as I’d be loath
        he should deserve it), I’ll engage myself, dear beauty,
        to thine honest heart: give me leave to love him, and
        I’ll give him a kind of leave to love thee. I know he
        hears me: I prithee, try mine eyes if they know him,
        that have almost drowned themselves in their own salt
        water, because they cannot see him. In troth, I’ll not
        chide him: if I speak words rougher than soft kisses, my
        penance shall be to see him kiss thee, yet to hold my
        peace.
          FRIS. And that’s torment enough: alas, poor wench!
          SIM. She’s an ass, by the crown of my maidenhead: I’d
        scratch her eyes out, if my man[774] stood in her
        tables.
          VIOL. Good partner, lodge me in thy private bed,
        Where, in supposed folly, he may end
        Determin’d sin. Thou smil’st: I know thou wilt.
        What looseness may term dotage, truly read,
        Is love ripe-gather’d, not soon withered.
          IMP. Good troth, pretty wedlock, thou makest my little
        eyes smart with washing themselves in brine. I keep your
        cock from his own roost, and mar such a sweet face, and
        wipe off that dainty red, and make Cupid toll the bell
        for your love-sick heart? no, no, no; if he were Jove’s
        own ingle,[775] Ganymede: fie, fie, fie, I’ll none. Your
        chamber-fellow is within: thou shalt enjoy my bed and
        thine own pleasure this night.—Simperina, conduct in
        this lady.—Frisco, silence. Ha, ha, ha! I am sorry to
        see a woman so tame a fool. Come, come, come.
          VIOL. Star of Venetian beauty, thanks.—O, who
        Can bear this wrong, and be a woman too?     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                 _A Street; before_ IMPERIA’s _House_.

      _Enter, on one side_, CAMILLO, HIPPOLITO, VIRGILIO,
          ASORINO, BAPTISTA, BENTIVOGLIO, DOYT, _and_ DANDYPRAT;
          _on the other, the_ DUKE _and Gentlemen, and_ BLURT
          _and his Watch with torches_.

          OMNES.[776] We are dishonour’d; give us way; he dies,
        He dies——
          DUKE. I charge you, by your duties to
        The state, and love to gentry, sheathe your weapons.
          BLURT. Stand: I charge you, put up your naked weapons,
        and we’ll put up our rusty bills.[777]
          CAM. Up to the hilts we will in his French body:
        My lord, we charge you, by the ravish’d honour
        Of an Italian lady, by our wrongs,
        By that eternal blot, which, if this slave
        Pass free without revenge, like leprosy
        Will run o’er[778] all the body of our fames;
        Give open way to our just wrath, lest, barr’d——
          DUKE. Gentlemen——
          CAM. Breaking the bonds of honour and of duty,
        We cut a passage through you with our swords.
          OMNES. He that withstands us, run him through.
          BLURT. I charge you, i’ th’ duke’s name, before his own
        face, to keep the peace.
          CAM. Keep thou the peace, that hast a peasant’s heart.
          WATCH. Peasant?
          CAM. Our peace must have her cheeks painted with
             blood.
          OMNES. Away through——
          BLURT. Sweet gentlemen, though you have called the
        duke’s own ghost peasant, for I walk for him i’ th’
        night—Kilderkin and Piss-breech hold out—yet hear me,
        dear bloods. The duke here, for fault of a better, and
        myself—Cuckoo, fly not hence—for fault of a better, are
        to lay you by the heels, if you go thus with fire and
        sword; for the duke is the head, and I, Blurt, am the
        purtenance.—Woodcock, keep by my side.—Now, sir[s]——
          OMNES. A plague upon this Woodcock! kill the watch.
          DUKE. Now, in the name of manhood, I conjure ye,
        Appear in your true shapes, Italians;
        You kill your honours more in this revenge
        Than in his murder. Stay, stand; here’s the house.
          BLURT. Right, sir, this is the whore-house; here he
        calls and sets in his staff.
          DUKE. Sheathe all your weapons, worthy gentlemen;
        And by my life I swear, if Fontinelle
        Have stain’d the honour of your sister’s bed,
        The fact being death, I’ll pay you his proud head.
          CAM. Arrest him then before our eyes; and see,
        Our fury sleeps.
          DUKE. This honest officer——
          BLURT. Blurt, sir——
          DUKE. Shall fetch him forth.—Go, sirrah, in our name
        Attach the French lord.
          BLURT. Garlic, and the rest, follow strongly.
                                             [_Exit with Watch._
          DUKE. O what a scandal were it to a state,
        To have a stranger, and a prisoner,
        Murder’d by such a troop! Besides, through Venice
        Are numbers of his countrymen dispers’d,
        Whose rage meeting with yours, none can prevent
        The mischief of a bloody consequent.

         _Re-enter_ BLURT _and Watch, holding_ FONTINELLE _and
                             his weapons_.

          BLURT. The duke is within an inch of your nose, and
        therefore I dare play with it, if you put not up;
        deliver, I advise you.
          FONT. Yield up my weapons, and my foe[s] so nigh!
        Myself and weapons shall together yield:
        Come any one, come all.
          OMNES. Kill, kill the Frenchman! kill him!
          DUKE. Be satisfied, my noble countrymen:
        I’ll trust you with his life, so you will pawn
        The faiths of gentlemen, no desperate hand
        Shall rob him of it; otherwise, he runs
        Upon this dangerous point, that dares appose[779]
        His rage ’gainst our authority.—French lord,
        Yield up this strength; our word shall be your guard.
          FONT. Who defies death, needs none; he’s well
             prepar’d.
          DUKE. My honest fellow, with a good defence,
        Enter again; fetch out the courtesan,
        And all that are within.
          BLURT. I’ll tickle her: it shall ne’er be said that a
        brown bill[780] looked pale.        [_Exit with Watch._
          CAM. Frenchman, thou art indebted to our duke.
          FONT. For what?
          CAM. Thy life; for, but for him, thy soul
        Had long ere this hung trembling in the air,
        Being frighted from thy bosom with our swords.
          FONT. I do not thank your duke; yet, if you will,
        Turn bloody executioners: who dies
        For so bright beauty ’s a bright sacrifice.
          DUKE. The beauty you adore so is profane;
        The breach of wedlock, by our law, is death.
          FONT. Law, give me law.
          DUKE. With all severity.
          FONT. In my love’s eyes immortal joys do dwell;
        She is my heaven; she from me, I’m[781] in hell:
        Therefore your law, your law.
          DUKE. Make way, she comes.

          _Re-enter_ BLURT _leading_ IMPERIA, _the rest of the
                    Watch with_ VIOLETTA _masqued_.

          IMP. Fie, fie, fie.
          BLURT. Your fie, fie, fie, nor your foh, foh, foh,
        cannot serve your turn; you must now bear it off with
        head and shoulders.
          DUKE. Now fetch Curvetto and the Spaniard hither;
        Their punishments shall lie under one doom.
        What is she masqu’d?
          BLURT. A punk too.—Follow, fellows: Slubber, afore.
                                             [_Exit with Watch._
          VIOL. She that is masqu’d is leader of this masque.
        What’s here? bows, bills, and guns! Noble Camillo,
                                                  [_Unmasquing._
         I’m sure you’re lord of this misrule:[782] I pray,
        For whose sake do you make this swaggering fray?
          CAM. For yours, and for our[783] own; we come resolv’d
        To murder him that poisons your chaste bed,
        To take revenge on you for your false heart;
        And, wanton dame, our wrath here must not sleep;
        Your sin being deep’st, your share shall be most deep.
          VIOL. With pardon of your grace, myself to you all,
        At your own weapons, thus do answer all.
        For paying away my heart, that was my own;
        Fight not to win that, in good troth, ’tis gone.
        For my dear love’s abusing my chaste bed,
        And her[784] sweet theft, alack, you are misled!
        This was a plot of mine, only to try
        Your love’s strange temper; sooth, I do not lie.
        My Fontinelle ne’er dallied in her arms;
        She never bound his heart with amorous charms:
        My Fontinelle ne’er loath’d my sweet embrace;
        She never drew love’s picture by his face:
        When he from her white hand would strive to go,
        She never cried, fie, fie, nor no, no, no.
        With prayers and bribes we hir’d her, both to lie
        Under that roof: for this must my love die?
        Who dare be so hard-hearted? Look you, we kiss,
        And if he loathe his Violet,[785] judge by this.
                                                 [_Kissing him._
          FONT. O sweetest Violet! I blush——
          VIOL. Good figure,
        Wear still that maiden blush, but still be mine.
          FONT. I seal myself thine own with both my hands,
        In this true deed of gift. Gallants, here stands
        This lady’s champion: at his foot I’ll lie[786]
        That dares touch her: who taints my constancy,
        I am no man for him; fight he with her,
        And yield, for she’s a noble conqueror.
          DUKE. This combat shall not need; for see, asham’d
        Of their rash vows, these gentlemen here break
        This storm, and do with hands what tongues should speak.
          OMNES. All friends, all friends!
          HIP. Punk, you may laugh at this:
        Here’s tricks! but, mouth, I’ll stop you with a kiss.

         _Enter_ CURVETTO _and_ LAZARILLO, _led by_ BLURT _and
                              the Watch_.

          BLURT. Room; keep all the scabs back, for here comes
           Lazarus.
          DUKE. O, here’s our other spirits that walk i’ th’
             night!
        Signior Curvetto, by complaint from her,
        And by your writing here, I reach the depth
        Of your offence. They charge your climbing up
        To be to rob her: if so, then by law
        You are to die, unless she marry you.
          IMP. I? fie, fie, fie, I will be burnt to ashes first.
          CUR. How, die, or marry her? then call me daw:[787]
        Marry her—she’s more common than the law—
        For boys to call me ox? no, I’m[788] not drunk;
        I’ll play with her, but, hang her! wed no punk.
        I shall be a hoary courtier then indeed,
        And have a perilous[789] head; then I were best
        Lie close, lie close, to hide my forked crest.
        No, fie, fie, fie; hang me before the door
        Where I was drown’d, ere I marry with a whore.
          DUKE. Well, signior, for we rightly understand,
        From your accusers, how you stood her guest,
        We pardon you, and pass it as a jest:
        And for the Spaniard sped so hardly too,
        Discharge him, Blurt: signior, we pardon you.
          BLURT. Sir, he’s not to be discharged, nor so to be shot
        off: I have put him into a new suit, and have entered
        into him with an action; he owes me two-and-thirty
        shillings.
          LAZ. It is thy honour to have me die in thy debt.
          BLURT. It would be more honour to thee to pay me before
        thou diest: twenty shillings of this debt came out of
        his nose.
          LAZ. Bear witness, great duke, he’s paid twenty
        shillings.
          BLURT. Signior, no, you cannot smoke me so. He took
        twenty shillings of it in a fume,[790] and the rest I
        charge him with for his lying.
          LAZ. My lying, most pitiful prince, was abominable.
          BLURT. He did lie, for the time, as well as any knight
        of the post[791] did ever lie.
          LAZ. I do here put off thy suit, and appeal: I warn thee
        to the court of conscience, and will pay thee by
        twopence a-week, which I will rake out of the hot embers
        of tobacco-ashes, and then travel on foot to the Indies
        for more gold, whose red cheeks I will kiss, and beat
        thee, Blurt, if thou watch for me.
          HIP. There be many of your countrymen in Ireland,
        signior; travel to them.
          LAZ. No, I will fall no more into bogs.
          DUKE. Sirrah, his debt ourself will satisfy.
          BLURT. Blurt, my lord, dare take your word for as much
        more.
          DUKE. And since this heat of fury is all spent,
        And tragic shapes meet comical event,
        Let this bright morning merrily be crown’d
        With dances, banquets, and choice music’s sound.
                                                [_Exeunt omnes._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                              THE PHŒNIX.




          _The Phoenix, as it hath beene sundrye times Acted by
          the Children of Paules, And presented before his
          Maiestie. London Printed by E. A. for A. I., and are
          to be solde at the signe of the white horse in Paules
          Churchyard._ 1607. 4to.

          A second edition, from which frequently words, and
          sometimes whole passages, have dropt out, appeared in
          1630, 4to. The acts and scenes are not distinguished
          in the old copies.

          _The Phœnix_ was licensed, by Sir George Bucke, 9th
          May, 1607. Chalmers’s _Suppl. Apol._ p. 200.

          According to the _Biographia Dramatica_ (a work on
          which I place no reliance), the plot of this play is
          taken from a Spanish novel, called _The Force of
          Love_.




                            DRAMATIS PERSONÆ
          DUKE OF FERRARA.
          PHŒNIX, _his son_.
          PRODITOR,   }
          LUSSURIOSO, } _nobles_.
          INFESTO,    }
          FIDELIO, _son to_ CASTIZA.
          CAPTAIN, _married to_ CASTIZA.
          FALSO, _a justice of peace_.
          LATRONELLO,   }
          FUCATO,       } _his servants_.
          FURTIVO,[792] }
           KNIGHT.
          TANGLE.
          QUIETO.
          _Groom._
          _Constable._
          _Boy._
          _Drawer._
          _Soldiers._
          _Suitors._
          _Nobles_, _Gentlemen_, _Officers_, _&c._

          CASTIZA, _mother to_ FIDELIO, _and married to the_
            CAPTAIN.
          _Jeweller’s wife, daughter to_ FALSO.
          _Niece to_ FALSO.
          _Maid to Jeweller’s wife._

                            SCENE, FERRARA.




                              THE PHŒNIX.




                                -------




                            ACT I. SCENE I.


           _A Chamber in the Palace of the Duke of Ferrara._

         _Enter the_ DUKE, PRODITOR, LUSSURIOSO, INFESTO, _and
                    other nobles, with attendants_.

          DUKE. My lords,
        Know that we, far from any natural pride,
        Or touch of temporal sway, have seen our face
        In our grave council’s foreheads, where doth stand
        Our truest glass, made by Time’s wrinkled hand.
        We know we’re old; my days proclaim me so;
        Forty-five years I’ve gently rul’d this dukedom;
        Pray heaven it be no fault!
        For there’s as much disease, though not to th’ eye,
        In too much pity as in tyranny.
          INFES. Your grace hath spoke it right.
          DUKE. I know that life
        Has not long course in me; ’twill not be long
        Before I shew that kings have mortal bodies
        As well as subjects: therefore to my comfort,
        And your successful hopes, I have a son,
        Whom I dare boast of——
          LUS. Whom we all do boast of;
        A prince elder in virtues than in years.
          INFES. His judgment is a father to his youth.
          PROD. Ay, ay, would he were from court!     [_Aside._
          INFES. Our largest hopes grow in him.
          PROD. And ’tis the greatest pity, noble lord,
        He is untravell’d.
          LUS. ’Tis indeed, my lord.
          PROD. Had he but travel to his time and virtue—
        O, he should ne’er return again!              [_Aside._
          DUKE. It shall be so: what is in hope begun,[793]
        Experience quickens; travel confirms the man,
        Who[794] else lives doubtful, and his days oft sorry:
        Who’s rich in knowledge has the stock of glory.
          PROD. Most true, my royal lord.
          DUKE. Some one attend our son.
          INFES. See, here he comes, my lord.

                 _Enter_ PHŒNIX, _attended by_ FIDELIO.

          DUKE. O, you come well.
          PHŒ. ’Tis always my desire, my worthy father.
          DUKE. Your serious studies, and those fruitful hours
        That grow up into judgment, well become
        Your birth, and all our loves: I weep that you are my
           son,
        But virtuously I weep, the more my gladness.
        We have thought good and meet, by the consent
        Of these our nobles, to move you toward travel,
        The better to approve you to yourself,
        And give your apter power foundation:
        To see affections actually presented,
        E’en by those men that owe[795] them, yield[s] more
           profit,
        Ay, more content, than singly to read of them,
        Since love or fear make writers partial.
        The good and free example which you find
        In other countries, match it with your own,
        The ill to shame the ill; which will in time
        Fully instruct you how to set in frame
        A kingdom all in pieces.
          PHŒ. Honour’d father,
        With care and duty I have listen’d to you.
        What you desire, in me it is obedience:
        I do obey in all, knowing for right,
        Experience is a kingdom’s better sight.
          PROD. O, ’tis the very lustre of a prince,
        Travel! ’tis sweet and generous.
          DUKE. He that knows how to obey, knows how to reign;
        And that true knowledge have we found in you.
        Make choice of your attendants.
          PHŒ. They’re soon chose;
        Only this man, my lord, a loving servant of mine.
          DUKE. What! none but he?
          PHŒ. I do intreat no more;
        For that’s the benefit a private gentleman
        Enjoys beyond our state, when he notes all,
        Himself unnoted.
        For, should I bear the fashion of a prince,
        I should then win more flattery than profit,
        And I should give ’em time and warning then
        To hide their actions from me: if I appear a sun,
        They’ll run into the shade with their ill deeds,
        And so prevent[796] me.
          PROD. A little too wise,[797] a little too wise to
             live long. [_Aside._
          DUKE. You have answer’d us with wisdom: let it be;
        Things private are best known through privacy.
                         [_Exeunt all but_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO.
          PHŒ. Stay you, my elected servant.
          FID. My kind lord.
          PHŒ. The duke my father has a heavy burden
        Of years upon him.
          FID. My lord, it seems so, for they make him stoop.
          PHŒ. Without dissemblance he is deep in age;
        He bows unto his grave. I wonder much
        Which of his wild nobility it should be
        (For none of his sad[798] council has a voice in’t),
        Should so far travel into his consent,
        To set me over into other kingdoms,
        Upon the stroke and minute of his death?
          FID. My lord, ’tis easier to suspect them all,
        Than truly to name one.
          PHŒ. Since it is thus,
        By absence I’ll obey the duke my father,
        And yet not wrong myself.
          FID. Therein, my lord,
        You might be happy twice.
          PHŒ. So it shall be;
        I’ll stay at home, and travel.
          FID. Would your grace
        Could make that good!
          PHŒ. I can: and, indeed, a prince need no[t] travel
        farther than his own kingdom, if he apply himself
        faithfully, worthy the glory of himself and expectation
        of others: and it would appear far nobler industry in
        him to reform those fashions that are already in his
        country, than to bring new ones in, which have neither
        true form nor fashion; to make his court an owl, city an
        ape, and the country a wolf preying upon the ridiculous
        pride of either: and therefore I hold it a safer
        stern,[799] upon this lucky advantage, since my father
        is near his setting, and I upon the eastern hill to take
        my rise, to look into the heart and bowels of this
        dukedom, and, in disguise, mark all abuses ready for
        reformation or punishment.
          FID. Give me but leave unfeignedly to admire you,
        Your wisdom is so spacious and so honest.
          PHŒ. So much have the complaints and suits of men,
        seven, nay, seventeen years neglected, still interposed
        by coin and great enemies, prevailed with my pity, that
        I cannot otherwise think but there are infectious
        dealings in most offices, and foul mysteries throughout
        all professions: and therefore I nothing doubt but to
        find travel enough within myself, and experience, I
        fear, too much: nor will I be curious[800] to fit my
        body to the humblest form and bearing, so the labour may
        be fruitful; for how can abuses that keep low, come to
        the right view of a prince, unless his looks lie level
        with them, which else will be longest hid from him?—he
        shall be the last man sees ’em.

        For oft between kings’ eyes and subjects’ crimes
        Stands there a bar of bribes: the under office
        Flatters him next above it, he the next,
        And so of most, or many.
        Every abuse will choose a brother:
        ’Tis through the world, this hand will rub the other.
          FID. You have set down the world briefly, my lord.
          PHŒ. But how am I assur’d of faith in thee?
        Yet I durst trust thee.
          FID. Let my soul be lost,
        When it shall loose your secrets: nor will I
        Only be a preserver of them, but,
        If you so please, an assister.
          PHŒ. It suffices:
        That king stands sur’st who by his virtue rises
        More than by birth or blood; that prince is rare,
        Who strives in youth to save his age from care.
        Let’s be prepar’d; away.
          FID. I’ll follow your grace.—         [_Exit_ PHŒNIX.
        Thou wonder of all princes, president, and glory,
        True Phœnix, made of an unusual strain!
        Who labours to reform is fit to reign.
        How can that king be safe that studies not
        The profit of his people? See where comes
        The best part of my heart, my love.

                          _Enter_ NIECE.[801]

          NIECE. Sir, I am bound to find you: I heard newly
        Of sudden travel which his grace intends,
        And only but yourself to accompany him.
          FID. You heard in that little beside the truth;
        Yet not so sudden as to want those manners,
        To leave you unregarded.
          NIECE. I did not think so unfashionably of you.
        How long is your return?
          FID. ’Tis not yet come to me, scarce to my lord.
        Unless the duke refer it to his pleasure;
        But long I think it is not: the duke’s age,
        If not his apt experience, will forbid it.
          NIECE. His grace commands, I must not think amiss:
        Farewell.
          FID. Nay, stay, and take this comfort;
        You shall hear often from us; I’ll direct
        Where you shall surely know; and I desire you
        Write me the truth, how my new father-in-law
        The captain bears himself toward my mother;
        For that marriage
        Knew nothing of my mind, it never flourish’d
        In any part of my affection.
          NIECE. Methinks sh’as much disgrac’d herself.
          FID. Nothing so,
        If he be good, and will abide the touch;
        A captain may marry a lady, if he can sail
        Into her good will.
          NIECE. Indeed that’s all.
          FID. ’Tis all
        In all; commend me to thy breast; farewell.
                                                  [_Exit_ NIECE.
         So by my lord’s firm policy we may see,
        To present view, what absent forms would be.   [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                  _A Room in the_ CAPTAIN’s _House_..

             _Enter the_ CAPTAIN _with soldiering fellows_.

          FIRST SOL. There’s noble purchase,[802] captain.
          SECOND SOL. Nay, admirable purchase.
          THIRD SOL. Enough to make us proud for ever.
          CAP. Hah?
          FIRST SOL. Never was opportunity so gallant.
          CAP. Why, you make me mad.
          SECOND SOL. Three ships, not a poop less.
          THIRD SOL. And every one so wealthily burdened, upon my
        manhood.
          CAP. Pox on’t, and now am I tied e’en as the devil would
        ha’t.
          FIRST SOL. Captain, of all men living, I would ha’ sworn
        thou wouldst ne’er have married.
          CAP. ’S foot, so would I myself, man; give me my due;
        you know I ha’ sworn all heaven over and over?
          FIRST SOL. That you have, i’faith.
          CAP. Why, go to then.
          FIRST SOL. Of a man that has tasted salt water to commit
        such a fresh trick!
          CAP. Why, ’tis abominable! I grant you, now I see’t.
          FIRST SOL. Had there been fewer women——
          SECOND SOL. And among those women fewer drabs——
          THIRD SOL. And among those drabs fewer pleasing——
          CAP. Then ’t had been something——
          FIRST SOL. But when there are more women, more common,
        pretty sweethearts, than ever any age could boast of——
          CAP. And I to play the artificer and marry! to have my
        wife dance at home, and my ship at sea, and both take in
        salt water together! O lieutenant, thou’rt happy! thou
        keepest a wench.
          FIRST SOL. I hope I am happier than so, captain, for a’
        my troth, she keeps me.
          CAP. How? is there any such fortunate man breathing? and
        I so miserable to live honest! I envy thee, lieutenant,
        I envy thee, that thou art such a happy knave. Here’s my
        hand among you; share it equally; I’ll to sea with you.
          SECOND SOL. There spoke a noble captain!
          CAP. Let’s hear from you; there will be news shortly.
          FIRST SOL. Doubt it not, captain.
                                      [_Exeunt all but_ CAPTAIN.
          CAP. What lustful passion came aboard of me, that I
        should marry? was I drunk? yet that cannot altogether
        hold, for it was four a’ clock i’ th’ morning; had it
        been five, I would ha’ sworn it. That a man is in danger
        every minute to be cast away, without he have an
        extraordinary pilot that can perform more than a man can
        do! and to say truth too, when I’m abroad, what can I do
        at home? no man living can reach so far: and what a
        horrible thing ’twould be to have horns brought me at
        sea, to look as if the devil were i’ th’ ship! and all
        the great tempests would be thought of my raising! to be
        the general curse of all merchants! and yet they likely
        are as deep in as myself; and that’s a comfort. O, that
        a captain should live to be married! nay, I that have
        been such a gallant salt-thief, should yet live to be
        married! What a fortunate elder brother is he, whose
        father being a rammish ploughman, himself a perfumed
        gentleman spending the labouring reek from his father’s
        nostrils in tobacco, the sweat of his father’s body in
        monthly physic for his pretty queasy[803] harlot! he
        sows apace i’ th’ country; the tailor o’ertakes him i’
        th’ city, so that oftentimes before the corn comes to
        earing,[804] ’tis up to the ears in high collars, and so
        at every harvest the reapers take pains for the mercers:
        ha! why, this is stirring happiness indeed. Would my
        father had held a plough so, and fed upon squeezed curds
        and onions, that I might have bathed in sensuality! but
        he was too ruttish himself to let me thrive under him;
        consumed me before he got me; and that makes me so
        wretched now to be shackled with a wife, and not greatly
        rich neither.

                         _Enter_ CASTIZA.[805]

          CAS. Captain, my husband.
          CAP. ’S life, call me husband again, and I’ll play the
        captain and beat you.
          CAS. What has disturb’d you, sir, that you now look
        So like an enemy upon me?
          CAP. Go make a widower [of me], hang thyself!
        How comes it that you are so opposite
        To love and kindness? I deserve more respect,
        But that you please to be forgetful of it.
          CAS. For love to you, did I neglect my state,
        Chide better fortunes from me,
        Gave the world talk, laid all my friends at waste!
          CAP. The more fool you: could you like none but me?
        Could none but I supply you? I am sure
        You were sued to by far worthier men,
        Deeper in wealth and gentry.
        What couldst thou see in me, to make thee doat
        So on me? If I know I am a villain,
        What a torment’s this! Why didst thou marry me?
        You think, as most of your insatiate widows,
        That captains can do wonders; when, alas,[806]
        The name does often prove the better man!
          CAS. That which you urge should rather give me cause
        To repent than yourself.
          CAP. Then to that end
        I do it.[807]
          CAS. What a miserable state
        Am I led into!

                         _Enter Servant._[808]

          CAP. How now, sir?
          SERV. Count Proditor
        Is now alighted.
          CAP. What, my lord? I must
        Make much of him; he’ll one day write me cuckold;
        It is[809] good to make much of such a man:
        E’en to my face he plies it hard,—I thank him.

                           _Enter_ PRODITOR.

        What, my worthy lord?
          PROD. I’ll come to you
        In order, captain.                   [_Kisses_ CASTIZA.
          CAP. O that’s in order!
        A kiss is the gamut to pricksong.
          PROD. Let me salute you, captain.    [_Exit_ CASTIZA.
          CAP. My dear
        Esteemed count, I have a life for you.
          PROD. Hear you the news?
          CAP. What may it be, my lord?
          PROD. My lord, the duke’s son, is upon his travel
        To several kingdoms.
          CAP. May it be possible, my lord,
        And yet so little rumour’d?
          PROD. Take’t of my truth;[810]
        Nay, ’twas well manag’d; things are as they are handl’d:
        But all my care is still, pray heaven he return
        Safe, without danger, captain.
          CAP. Why, is there any doubt
        To be had of that, my lord?
          PROD. Ay, by my faith, captain:
        Princes have private enemies, and great.
        Put case a man should grudge him for his virtues,
        Or envy him for his wisdom; why, you know,
        This makes him lie bare-breasted to his foe.
          CAP. That’s full of certainty, my lord; but who
        Be his attendants?
          PROD. Thence, captain, comes the fear;
        But singly[811] attended neither (my best gladness),
        Only by your son-in-law, Fidelio.
          CAP. Is it to be believed? I promise you, my lord, then
        I begin to fear him myself; that fellow will undo him: I
        durst undertake to corrupt him with twelvepence over and
        above, and that’s a small matter; has a whorish
        conscience; he’s an inseparable knave,[812] and I could
        ne’er speak well of that fellow.
          PROD. All we of the younger house, I can tell you, do
        doubt him much. The lady’s removed: shall we have your
        sweet society, captain?
          CAP. Though it be in mine own house, I desire I may
        follow your lordship.
          PROD. I love to avoid strife.——
        Not many months Phœnix shall keep his life.
                                              [_Aside and exit._
          CAP. So; his way is in; he knows it.
        We must not be uncourteous to a lord;
        Warn him our house ’twere vild.[813]
         His presence is an honour: if he lie with our wives,
        ’tis for our credit; we shall be the better trusted;
        ’tis a sign we shall live i’ th’ world. O, tempests and
        whirlwinds! who but that man whom the forefinger[814]
        cannot daunt, that makes his shame his living—who but
        that man, I say, could endure to be throughly married?
        Nothing but a divorce can relieve me: any way to be rid
        of her would rid my torment; if all means fail, I’ll
        kill or poison her, and purge my fault at sea. But first
        I’ll make gentle try of a divorce: but how shall I
        accuse her subtle honesty? I’ll attach this lord’s
        coming to her, take hold of that, ask counsel: and now I
        remember, I have acquaintance with an old crafty client,
        who, by the puzzle of suits and shifting of courts, has
        more tricks and starting-holes than the dizzy pates of
        fifteen attorneys; one that has been muzzled in law like
        a bear, and led by the ring of his spectacles from
        office to office.
         Him I’ll seek out with haste; all paths I’ll tread,
        All deaths I’ll die, ere I die married.        [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                _Another Room in the_ CAPTAIN’s _House_.

                    _Enter_ PRODITOR _and_ CASTIZA.

          PROD. Pooh, you do resist me hardly.
          CAS. I beseech your lordship, cease in this: ’tis never
        to be granted. If you come as a friend unto my honour,
        and my husband, you shall be ever welcome; if not, I
        must entreat it——
          PROD. Why, assure yourself, madam, ’tis not the fashion.
          CAS. ’Tis more my grief, my lord; such as myself
        Are judg’d the worse for such.
          PROD. Faith, you’re too nice:
        You’ll see me kindly forth?
          CAS. And honourably welcome.[815]          [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE IV.


                          _A Room in an Inn._

            _Enter Groom lighting in_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO.

          GROOM. Gentlemen, you’re most neatly welcome.
          PHŒ. You’re very cleanly, sir: prithee, have a care to
        our geldings.
          GROOM. Your geldings shall be well considered.
          FID. Considered?
          PHŒ. Sirrah, what guess[816] does this inn hold now?
          GROOM. Some five and twenty gentlemen, besides their
        beasts.
          PHŒ. Their beasts?
          GROOM. Their wenches, I mean, sir; for your worship
        knows those that are under men are beasts.
          PHŒ. How does your mother, sir?
          GROOM. Very well in health, I thank you heartily, sir.
          PHŒ. And so is my mare, i’faith.
          GROOM. I’ll do her commendations indeed, sir.
          FID. Well kept up, shuttlecock!
          PHŒ. But what old fellow was he that newly alighted
        before us?
          GROOM. Who, he? as arrant a crafty fellow as e’er made
        water on horseback. Some say, he’s as good as a lawyer;
        marry, I’m sure he’s as bad as a knave: if you have any
        suits in law, he’s the fittest man for your company; has
        been so towed[817] and lugged himself, that he is able
        to afford you more knavish counsel for ten groats than
        another for ten shillings.
          PHŒ. A fine fellow! but do you know him to be a knave,
        and will lodge him?
          GROOM. Your worship begins to talk idly; your bed shall
        be made presently: if we should not lodge knaves, I
        wonder how we should be able to live honestly: are there
        honest men enough, think you, in a term-time to fill all
        the inns in the town? and, as far as I can see, a
        knave’s gelding eats no more hay than an honest man’s;
        nay, a[818] thief’s gelding eats less, I’ll stand to’t;
        his master allows him a better ordinary; yet I have my
        eightpence day and night: ’twere more for our profit,
        I wus,[819] you were all thieves, if you were so
        contented. I shall be called for: give your worships
        good morrow.                                   [_Exit._
          PHŒ. A royal knave, i’faith: we have happened into a
        godly inn.
          FID. Assure you, my lord, they belong all to one church.
          PHŒ. This should be some old, busy, turbulent fellow:
        [a] villanous law-worm, that eats holes into poor men’s
        causes.

             _Enter_ TANGLE _with two Suitors, and Groom_.

          FIRST SUIT. May it please your worship to give me
        leave?
          TAN. I give you leave, sir; you have your _veniam_.—Now
        fill me a brown toast, sirrah.
          GROOM. Will you have no drink to’t, sir?
          TAN. Is that a question in law?
          GROOM. Yes, in the lowest court, i’ th’ cellar, sir.
          TAN. Let me ha’t removed presently, sir.
          GROOM. It shall be done, sir.                [_Exit._
          TAN. Now as you were saying, sir,—I’ll come to you
        immediately too.
          PHŒ. O, very well, sir.
          TAN. I’m a little busy, sir.
          FIRST SUIT. But as how, sir?
          TAN. I pray, sir?
          FIRST SUIT. Has brought me into the court; marry, my
        adversary has not declared yet.
          TAN. _Non declaravit adversarius_, sayest thou? what a
        villain’s that! I have a trick to do thee good: I will
        get thee out a proxy, and make him declare, with a pox
        to him.
          FIRST SUIT. That will make him declare to his sore
        grief; I thank your good worship: but put case he do
        declare?
          TAN. _Si declarasset_, if he should declare there——
          FIRST SUIT. I would be loath to stand out to the
        judgment of that court.
          TAN. _Non ad judicium_, do you fear corruption? then
        I’ll relieve you again; you shall get a _supersedeas non
        molestandum_, and remove it higher.
          FIRST SUIT. Very good.
          TAN. Now if it should ever come to a _testificandum_,
        what be his witnesses?
          FIRST SUIT. I little fear his witnesses.
          TAN. _Non metuis testes?_ more valiant man than Orestes.
          FIRST SUIT. Please you, sir, to dissolve this into wine,
        ale, or beer. [_Giving money._] I come a hundred mile to
        you, I protest, and leave all other counsel behind me.
          TAN. Nay, you shall always find me a sound card: I stood
        not a’ th’ pillory for nothing in 88; all the world
        knows that.—Now let me despatch you, sir.—I come to you
        _presenter_.
          SECOND SUIT. Faith, the party hath removed both body and
        cause with a _habeas corpus_.
          TAN. Has he that knavery? but has he put in bail above,
        canst tell?
          SECOND SUIT. That I can assure your worship he has not.
          TAN. Why, then, thy best course shall be, to lay out
        more money, take out a _procedendo_, and bring down the
        cause and him with a vengeance.
          SECOND SUIT. Then he will come indeed.
          TAN. As for the other party, let the _audita querela_
        alone; take me out a special _supplicavit_, which will
        cost you enough, and then you pepper him. For the first
        party after the _procedendo_ you’ll get costs; the cause
        being found, you’ll have a judgment; _nunc pro tunc_,
        you’ll get a _venire facias_ to warn your jury, a _decem
        tales_ to fill up the number, and a _capias utlagatum_
        for your execution.
          SECOND SUIT. I thank you, my learned counsel.
          PHŒ. What a busy caterpillar’s this! let’s accost him in
        that manner.
          FID. Content, my lord.
          PHŒ. O my old admirable fellow, how have I all this
        while thirsted to salute thee! I knew thee in _octavo_
        of the duke——
          TAN. In _octavo_ of the duke? I remember the year well.
          PHŒ. By th’ mass, a lusty, proper[820] man!
          TAN. O, was I?
          PHŒ. But still in law.
          TANG. Still in law? I had not breathed else now; ’tis
        very marrow, very manna to me to be in law; I’d been
        dead ere this else. I have found such sweet pleasure in
        the vexation of others, that I could wish my years over
        and over again, to see that fellow a beggar, that
        bawling knave a gentleman, a matter brought e’en to a
        judgment to-day, as far as e’er ’twas to begin again to-
        morrow: O raptures! here a writ of demur, there a
        _procedendo_, here a _sursurrara_,[821] there a
        _capiendo_, tricks, delays, money-laws!
          PHŒ. Is it possible, old lad?
          TAN. I have been a term-trotter[822] myself any time
        this five and forty years; a goodly time and a gracious:
        in which space I ha’ been at least sixteen times
        beggared, and got up again; and in the mire again, that
        I have stunk again, and yet got up again.
          PHŒ. And so clean and handsome now?
          TAN. You see it apparently; I cannot hide it from you:
        nay, more, in _felici hora_ be it spoken, you see I’m
        old, yet have I at this present nine and twenty suits in
        law.
          PHŒ. Deliver us, man!
          TAN. And all not worth forty shillings.
          PHŒ. May it be believed?
          TAN. The pleasure of a man is all.
          PHŒ. An old fellow, and such a stinger!
          TAN. A stake pulled out of my hedge, there’s one; I was
        well beaten, I remember, that’s two; I took one a-bed
        with my wife again[823] her will, that’s three; I was
        called cuckold for my labour, that’s four; I took
        another a-bed again, that’s five; then one called me
        wittol,[824] that’s six; he killed my dog for barking,
        seven; my maid-servant was knocked at that time, eight;
        my wife miscarried with a push, nine; _et sic de
        cæteris_. I have so vexed and beggared the whole parish
        with process, subpœnas, and such-like molestations, they
        are not able to spare so much ready money from a term,
        as would set up a new weathercock; the churchwardens are
        fain to go to law with the poors’ money.
          PHŒ. Fie, fie!
          TAN. And I so fetch up all the men every term-time, that
        ’tis impossible to be at civil cuckoldry within
        ourselves, unless the whole country rise upon our wives.
          FID. A’ my faith, a pretty policy!
          PHŒ. Nay, an excellent stratagem: but of all I most
        wonder at the continual substance of thy wit, that,
        having had so many suits in law from time to time, thou
        hast still money to relieve ’em.
          FID. Has the best fortune for that; I never knew him
        without.
          TAN. Why do you so much wonder at that? Why, this is my
        course: my mare and I come up some five days before a
        term.
          PHŒ. A good decorum!
          TAN. Here I lodge, as you see, amongst inns and places
        of most receipt——
          PHŒ. Very wittily.
          TAN. By which advantage I dive into countrymen’s causes;
        furnish ’em with knavish counsel, little to their
        profit; buzzing into their ears this course, that writ,
        this office, that _ultimum refugium_; as you know I have
        words enow for the purpose.
          PHŒ. Enow a’ conscience, i’faith.
          TAN. Enow a’ law, no matter for conscience. For which
        busy and laborious sweating courtesy, they cannot choose
        but feed me with money, by which I maintain mine own
        suits: hoh, hoh, hoh!
          PHŒ. Why, let me hug thee: caper in mine arms.
          TAN. Another special trick I have, no body must know it,
        which is, to prefer most of those men to one attorney,
        whom I affect best: to answer which kindness of mine, he
        will sweat the better in my cause, and do them the less
        good: take’t of my word, I helped my attorney to more
        clients the last term than he will despatch all his
        lifetime; I did it.
          PHŒ. What a noble, memorable deed was there!

                           _Re-enter Groom._

          GROOM. Sir.
          TAN. Now, sir?
          GROOM. There’s a kind of captain very robustiously
        inquires for you.
          TAN. For me? a man of war? A man of law is fit for a man
        of war: we have no leisure to say prayers; we both kill
        a’ Sunday mornings. I’ll not be long from your sweet
        company.
          PHŒ. O, no, I beseech you.
                                    [_Exit_ TANGLE _with Groom_.
          FID. What captain might this be?
          PHŒ. Thou angel sent amongst us, sober Law,
        Made with meek eyes, persuading action,
        No loud immodest tongue,
        Voic’d like a virgin, and as chaste from sale,
        Save only to be heard, but not to rail;
        How has abuse deform’d thee to all eyes,
        That where thy virtues sat, thy vices rise!
        Yet why so rashly for one villain’s fault
        Do I arraign whole man? Admired Law,
        Thy upper parts must needs be sacred, pure,[825]
        And incorruptible; they’re grave and wise:
        ’Tis but the dross beneath ’em, and the clouds
        That get between thy glory and their praise,
        That make the visible and foul eclipse;
        For those that are near to thee are upright,
        As noble in their conscience as their birth;
        Know that damnation is in every bribe,
        And rarely[826] put it from ’em; rate the presenters,
        And scourge ’em with five years’ imprisonment,
        For offering but to tempt ’em.
        Thus is true justice exercis’d and us’d:
        Woe to the giver when the bribe’s refus’d!
        ’Tis not their will to have law worse than war,
        Where still the poor’st die first;
        To send a man without a sheet to his grave,
        Or bury him in his papers;
        ’Tis not their mind it should be, nor to have
        A suit hang longer than a man in chains,
        Let him be ne’er so fasten’d. They least know
        That are above the tedious steps below:
        I thank my time, I do.
          FID. I long to know what captain this should be.
          PHŒ. See where the bane of every cause returns.

                   _Re-enter_ TANGLE _with_ CAPTAIN.

          FID. ’S foot, ’tis the captain my father-in-law, my
        lord.
          PHŒ. Take heed.
          CAP. The divorce shall rest then, and the five hundred
        crowns shall stand in full force and virtue.
          TAN. Then do you wisely, captain.
          CAP. Away sail I: fare thee well.
          TAN. A lusty crack of wind go with thee!
          CAP. But ah——
          TAN. Hah?
          CAP. Remember, a scrivener.
          TAN. I’ll have him for thee. [_Exit_ CAPTAIN.]—Why,
        thus am I sought after by all professions. Here’s a
        weather-beaten captain, who, not long since new
        married to a lady widow, would now fain have sued a
        divorce between her and him, but that her honesty is
        his only hinderance: to be rid of which, he does
        determine to turn her into white money; and there’s a
        lord, his chapman, has bid five hundred crowns for her
        already.
          FID. How?
          TAN. Or for his part or whole in her.
          PHŒ. Why, does he mean to sell his wife?
          TAN. His wife? Ay, by th’ mass, he would sell his soul
        if he knew what merchant would lay out money upon’t; and
        some of ’em have need of one, they swear so fast.
          PHŒ. Why, I never heard of the like.
          TAN. _Non audivisti_, didst ne’er hear of that trick?
        Why, Pistor, a baker, sold his wife t’other day to a
        cheesemonger, that made cake and cheese; another to a
        cofferer; a third to a common player: why, you see
        ’tis common. Ne’er fear the captain: he has not so
        much wit to be a precedent himself. I promised to
        furnish him with an odd scrivener of mine own, to draw
        the bargain and sale of his lady. Your horses stand
        here, gentlemen?[827]
          PHŒ. Ay, ay, ay.
          TAN. I shall be busily plunged till towards bedtime
        above the chin _in profundis_.                  [_Exit._
          PHŒ. What monstrous days are these!
        Not only to be vicious most men study,
        But in it to be ugly; strive to exceed
        Each other in the most deformed deed.
          FID. Was this her private choice? did she neglect
        The presence and opinion of her friends
        For this?
          PHŒ. I wonder who that one should be,
        Should so disgrace that reverend name of lord,
        So loathsomely to buy adultery?
          FID. We may make means to know.
          PHŒ. Take courage, man; we’ll beget some defence.
          FID. I’m[828] bound by nature.
          PHŒ. I by conscience.
        To sell his lady! Indeed, she was a beast
        To marry him; and so he makes of her.—
        Come, I’ll thorough now I’m enter’d.         [_Exeunt._


                                SCENE V.


                              _A Street._

                    _Enter Jeweller’s Wife and Boy._

          JEW. WIFE. Is my sweet knight coming? are you certain
        he’s coming?
          BOY. Certain, forsooth; I am sure I saw him out of the
        barber’s shop, ere I would come away.
          JEW. WIFE. A barber’s shop? O, he’s a trim knight! would
        he venture his body into a barber’s shop, when he knows
        ’tis as dangerous as a piece of Ireland? O, yonder,
        yonder he comes! Get you back again, and look you say as
        I advised you.
          BOY. You know me, mistress.
          JEW. WIFE. My mask, my mask.             [_Exit Boy._

        _Enter_ KNIGHT, _and Lackey following at some distance_.

          KNIGHT. My sweet Revenue!
          JEW. WIFE. My Pleasure, welcome! I have got single; none
        but you shall accompany me to the justice of peace, my
        father’s.
          KNIGHT. Why, is thy father justice of peace, and I not
        know it?
          JEW. WIFE. My father? i’faith, sir, ay; simply though I
        stand here a citizen’s wife, I am a justice of peace’s
        daughter.
          KNIGHT. I love thee the better for thy birth.
          JEW. WIFE. Is that your lackey yonder, in the
        steaks[829] of velvet?
          KNIGHT. He’s at thy service, my sweet Revenue, for thy
        money paid for ’em.
          JEW. WIFE. Why, then, let him run a little before, I
        beseech thee; for, a’ my troth, he will discover us
        else.
          KNIGHT. He shall obey thee.—Before, sirrah, trudge.
        [_Exit Lackey._]—But do you mean to lie at your father’s
        all night?
          JEW. WIFE. Why should I desire your company else?
          KNIGHT. ’S foot, where shall I lie then?
          JEW. WIFE. What an idle question’s that! why, do you
        think I cannot make room for you in my father’s house as
        well as in my husband’s? they’re both good for nothing
        else.
          KNIGHT. A man so resolute in valour as a woman in
        desire, were an absolute leader.             [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE VI.


                      _A Room in_ FALSO’S _House_.

                    _Enter_ FALSO _and two Suitors_.

          FIRST SUIT. May it please your good worship, master
        justice——
          FAL. Please me and please yourself; that’s my word.
          FIRST SUIT. The party your worship sent for will by no
        means be brought to appear.
          FAL. He will not? then what would you advise me to do
        therein?
          FIRST SUIT. Only to grant your worship’s warrant, which
        is of sufficient force to compel him.
          FAL. No, by my faith, you shall not have me in that
        trap: am I sworn justice of peace, and shall I give my
        warrant to fetch a man against his will? why, there the
        peace is broken. We must do all quietly: if he come,
        he’s welcome; and as far as I can see yet, he’s a fool
        to be absent,—ay, by this gold is he—which he gave me
        this morning.

                                                       [_Aside._
          FIRST SUIT. Why, but may it please your good worship—
          FAL. I say again, please me and please yourself; that’s
        my word still.
          FIRST SUIT. Sir, the world esteems it a common favour,
        upon the contempt of the party, the justice to grant his
        warrant.
          FAL. Ay, ’tis so common, ’tis the worse again; ’twere
        the better for me ’twere otherwise.
          FIRST SUIT. I protest, sir, and this gentleman can say
        as much, it lies upon my half undoing.
          FAL. I cannot see yet that it should be so,—I see not a
        cross ye.[830]                     [_Aside._
          FIRST SUIT. I beseech your worship shew me your
        immediate favour, and accept this small trifle but as a
        remembrance to my succeeding thankfulness.
          FAL. Angels?[831] I’ll not meddle with them; you give
        ’em to my wife, not to me.
          FIRST SUIT. Ay, ay, sir.
          FAL. But I pray tell me now, did the party viva voce,
        with his own mouth, deliver that contempt, that he would
        not appear, or did you but jest in’t?
          FIRST SUIT. Jest? no, a’ my troth, sir; such was his
        insolent answer.
          FAL. And do you think it stood with my credit to put up
        such an abuse? Will he not appear, says he? I’ll make
        him appear with a vengeance.—Latronello!

                          _Enter_ LATRONELLO.

          LAT. Does your worship call?
          FAL. Draw me a strong-limbed warrant for the gentleman
        speedily; he will be bountiful to thee.—Go and thank him
        within.
          FIRST SUIT. I shall know your worship hereafter.
          FAL. Ay, I prithee do. [_Exeunt Suitors with_
        LATRONELLO.] Two angels one party, four another: and I
        think it a great spark of wisdom and policy, if a man
        come to me for justice, first to know his griefs by his
        fees, which be light, and which be heavy; he may
        counterfeit else, and make me do justice for nothing: I
        like not that; for when I mean to be just, let me be
        paid well for’t: the deed so rare purges the bribe.

                            _Enter_ FURTIVO.

        How now? what’s the news, thou art come so hastily? how
        fares my knightly brother?
          FUR. Troth, he ne’er fared worse in his life, sir; he
        ne’er had less stomach to his meat since I knew him.
          FAL. Why, sir?
          FUR. Indeed he’s dead, sir.
          FAL. How, sir?
          FUR. Newly deceased, I can assure your worship: the
        tobacco-pipe new dropt out of his mouth before I took
        horse; a shrewd sign; I knew then there was no way but
        one with him; the poor pipe was the last man he took
        leave of in this world, who fell in three pieces before
        him, and seemed to mourn inwardly, for it looked as
        black i’ th’ mouth as my master.
          FAL. Would he die so like a politician, and not once
        write his mind to me?
          FUR. No, I’ll say that for him, sir, he died in the
        perfect state of memory; made your worship his full and
        whole executor, bequeathing his daughter, and with her
        all his wealth, only to your disposition.
          FAL. Did he make such a godly end, sayest thou? did he
        die so comfortably, and bequeath all to me?
          FUR. Your niece is at hand, sir, the will, and the
        witnesses.
          FAL. What a precious joy and comfort’s this, that a
        justice’s brother can die so well, nay, in such a good
        and happy memory, to make me full executor! Well, he was
        too honest to live, and that made him die so soon. Now I
        beshrew my heart, I am glad he’s in heaven, has left all
        his cares and troubles with me, and that great vexation
        of telling of money: yet I hope he had so much grace
        before he died to turn his white money into gold, a
        great ease to his executor.
          FUR. See, here comes your niece, my young mistress, sir.

                   _Enter_ NIECE _and two Gentlemen_.

          FAL. Ah, my sweet niece, let me kiss thee, and drop a
        tear between thy lips! one tear from an old man is a
        great matter; the cocks of age are dry. Thou hast lost a
        virtuous father, to gain a notable uncle.
          NIECE. My hopes now rest in you next under heaven.
          FAL. Let ’em rest, let ’em rest.
          FIRST GENT. Sir——
          FAL. You’re most welcome ere ye begin, sir.
          FIRST GENT. We are both led by oath and dreadful
             promise,
        Made to the dying man at his last sense,
          First to deliver these into your hands,
        The sureties and revealers of his state——
                                               [_Giving papers._
          FAL. Good.
          FIRST GENT. With this his only daughter, and your
             niece,
        Whose fortunes are at your disposing set;
        Uncle and father are in you both met.
          FAL. Good, i’faith; a well-spoken gentleman!
        You’re not an esquire, sir?
          FIRST GENT. Not, sir.
          FAL. Not, sir? more’s the pity; by my faith, better men
        than you are, but a great many worse: you see I have
        been a scholar in my time, though I’m a justice
        now.—Niece, you’re most happily welcome: the charge of
        you is wholly and solely mine own; and since you are so
        fortunately come, niece, I’ll rest a perpetual widower.

          NIECE. I take the meaning chaster than the words:
        Yet I hope well of both, since it is thus,
        His phrase offends least that’s known humorous.
          FAL. [_reading the will._] _I make my brother_, says he,
        _full and whole executor_: honestly done of him,
        i’faith! seldom can a man get such a brother: and here
        again says he, very virtuously, _I bequeath all to him
        and his disposing_. An excellent fellow, a’ my troth!
        Would you might all die no worse, gentlemen!

                 _Enter_ KNIGHT _and_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.

          FIRST GENT. But as much better as might be.
          KNIGHT. Bless your uprightness, master justice!
          FAL. You’re most soberly welcome, sir.—Daughter, you’ve
        that ye kneel for: rise, salute your weeping cousin.
          JEW. WIFE. Weeping, cousin?
          NIECE. Ay, cousin.
          KNIGHT. Eye to weeping is very proper, and so is the
        party that spake it; believe me, a pretty, fine,
        slender, straight, delicate-knit body:

        O, how it moves a pleasure through our senses!
        How small are women’s waists to their expenses!
        I cannot see her face, that’s under water yet.
          JEW. WIFE. News as cold to the heart as an old man’s
        kindness; my uncle dead!
          NIECE. I have lost the dearest father!
          FAL. [_reading the will._] _If she marry by your
        consent, choice, and liking, make her dowry five
        thousand crowns_: hum, five thousand crowns? therefore
        by my consent she shall ne’er marry; I will neither
        choose for her, like of it, nor consent to’t.
        [_Aside._
          KNIGHT. Now, by the pleasure of my blood, a pretty
        cousin! I would not care if I were as near kin to her as
        I have been to her kinswoman.       [_Aside._
          FAL. Daughter, what gentleman might this be?
          JEW. WIFE. No gentleman, sir; he’s a knight.
          FAL. Is he but a knight? troth, I would a’ sworn had
        been a gentleman, to see, to see, to see.
          JEW. WIFE. He’s my husband’s own brother, I can tell
        you, sir.
          FAL. Thy husband’s brother? speak certainly, prithee.
          JEW. WIFE. I can assure you, father, my husband and he
        have[833] lain both in one belly.
          FAL. I’ll swear then he is his brother indeed, and by
        the surer side.—I crave hearty pardon, sweet kinsman,
        that thou hast stood so long unsaluted in the way of
        kindred:

        Welcome[834] to my board: I have a bed for thee:
        My daughter’s husband’s brother shall command
        Keys of my chests and chambers:
        I have stable for thy horse, chamber for thyself,
        And a loft above for thy lousy lackey, all fit.
        Away with handkerchers, [and] dry up eyes:
        At funeral we must cry; now let’s be wise.
                 [_Exeunt all but_ KNIGHT _and_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.
          JEW. WIFE. I told you his affection.
          KNIGHT.[835] It falls sweetly.
          JEW. WIFE. But here I bar you from all plots to-night,
        The time is yet too heavy to be light.
          KNIGHT. Why, I’m content; I’ll sleep as chaste as you,
        And wager night by night who keeps most true.
          JEW. WIFE. Well, we shall see your temper.
                                                      [_Exeunt._




                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                          _A Room in an Inn._

                     _Enter_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO.

          PHŒ. Fear not me, Fidelio: become you that invisible
        ropemaker the scrivener, that binds a man as he walks,
        yet all his joints at liberty, as well as I’ll fit that
        common folly of gentry, the easy-affecting venturer; and
        no doubt our purpose will arrive most happily.
          FID. Chaste duty, my lord, works powerfully in me; and
        rather than the poor lady my mother should fall upon the
        common side of rumour to beggar her name, I would not
        only undergo all habits, offices, disguised professions,
        though e’en opposite to the temper my blood holds; but
        in the stainless quarrel of her reputation, alter my
        shape for ever.
          PHŒ. I love thee wealthier; thou hast a noble
        touch:[836] and by this means, which is the only safe
        means to preserve thy mother from such an ugly land and
        sea monster as a counterfeit captain is, he resigning
        and basely selling all his estate, title, right, and
        interest in his lady, as the form of the writing shall
        testify,
         What otherwise can follow but to have
        A lady safe deliver’d of a knave?
          FID. I am in debt my life to the free goodness of your
        inventions.
          PHŒ. O, they must ever strive to be so good!
        Who sells his vow is stamp’d the slave of blood.
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                   _A Room in the_ CAPTAIN’S _House_.

            _Enter_ CAPTAIN, _and_ CASTIZA _following him_.

          CAP. Away!
          CAS. Captain, my husband——
          CAP. Hence! we’re at a price for thee, at a price;
        Wants but the telling and the sealing; then——
          CAS. Have you no sense, neither of my good name
        Or your own credit?
          CAP. Credit? pox of credit,
        That makes me owe so much! it had been
        Better for me by a thousand royals[837]
        I had lost my credit seven year ago.
        It has[838] undone me: that’s it that makes me fly:
        What need I to sea else, in the spring-time,
        When woods have leaves, to look upon bald oak?
        Happier that man, say I, whom no man trusts!
        It makes him valiant, dares outface the prisons;
        Upon whose carcass no gown’d raven jets:[839]
        O, he that has no credit owes no debts!
        ’Tis time I were rid on’t.
          CAS. O, why do you
        So wilfully cherish your own poison,
        And breathe against the best of life, chaste credit?
        Well may I call it chaste; for, like a maid,
        Once falsely broke, it ever lives decay’d.
        O captain, husband! you name that dishonest,
        By whose good power all that are honest live:
        What madness is it to speak ill of that,
        Which makes all men speak well! Take away credit,
        By which men amongst men are well reputed,
        That man may live, but still lives executed.
        O, then, shew pity to that noble title,
        Which else you do usurp! you’re no true captain,
        To let your enemies lead you: foul disdain
        And everlasting scandal, O, believe it!
        The money you receive for my good name
        Will not be half enough to pay your shame.
          CAP. No? I’ll sell thee then to the smock: see, here
             comes
        My honourable chapman.

                     _Enter_ PRODITOR _and Lackey_.

          CAS. O my poison!
        Him whom mine honour and mine eye abhors.      [_Exit._
          PROD. Lady,—what, so unjovially departed?
          CAP. Fine she-policy! she makes my back her bolster; but
        before my face she not endures him: tricks!
          PROD. Captain, how haps it she remov’d so
             strangely?[840]
          CAP. O, for modesty’s cause, awhile, my lord,
        She must restrain herself; she’s not yours yet.
        Beside, it were not wisdom to appear
        Easy before my sight.
         Faugh! wherefore serves modesty but to pleasure a lady
        now and then, and help her from suspect? that’s the best
        use ’tis put to.
          PROD. Well observed of a captain!
          CAP. No doubt you’ll be soon friends, my lord.
          PROD. I think no less.
          CAP. And make what haste I can to my ship, I durst wager
        you’ll be under sail before me.
          PROD. A pleasant voyage, captain!
          CAP. Ay, a very pleasant voyage as can be. I see the
        hour is ripe:

        Here comes the prison’s bawd, the bond-maker,
        One that binds heirs before they are begot.
          PROD. And here are the crowns, captain.
                                            [_Giving him money._

            _Enter_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO, _both disguised_.

        Go, attend: let our bay-courser wait.
          LACKEY. It shall be obeyed.                   [_Exit._
          CAP. A farmer’s son, is’t true?
          FID. Has crowns to scatter.
          CAP. I give you your salute, sir.
          PHŒ. I take it not unthankfully, sir.
          CAP. I hear a good report of you, sir; you’ve money.
          PHŒ. I have so, true.
          CAP. An excellent virtue.
          PHŒ. Ay, to keep from you.                  [_Aside._
         Hear you me, captain? I have a certain generous itch,
        sir, to lose a few angels[841] in the way of profit:
        ’tis but a game at tennis, where, if

        The ship keep above line, ’tis three to one;
        If not, there’s but three hundred angels gone.
          CAP. Is your venture three hundred? you’re very
        preciously welcome: here’s a voyage toward[842] will
        make us all——
          PHŒ. Beggarly fools and swarming knaves.    [_Aside._
          PROD. Captain, what’s he?
          CAP. Fear him not, my lord; he’s a gull: he ventures
        with me; some filthy farmer’s son; the father’s a Jew,
        and the son a gentleman: faugh!
          PROD. Yet he should be a Jew too, for he is new come
        from giving over swine.
          CAP. Why, that in our country makes him a gentleman.
          PROD. Go to; tell your money, captain.
          CAP. Read aloft, scrivener.—One, two.
                                          [_Counting the money._
          FID. [_reads._] _To all good and honest Christian
        people, to whom this present writing shall come: know
        you for a certain, that I captain, for and in the
        consideration of the sum of five hundred crowns, have
        clearly bargained, sold, given, granted, assigned, and
        set over, and by these presents do clearly bargain,
        sell, give, grant, assign, and set over, all the right,
        estate, title, interest, demand, possession, and term of
        years to come, which I the said captain have, or ought
        to have_——
          PHŒ. If I were as good as I should be.      [_Aside._
          FID. _In and to Madonna Castiza, my most virtuous,
        modest, loving, and obedient wife_——
          CAP. By my troth, my lord, and so she is.—Three, four,
        five, six, seven.                 [_Counting the money._
          PHŒ. The more slave he that says it, and not sees it.
                            [_Aside._
          FID. _Together with all and singular those admirable
        qualities with which her noble breast is furnished._
          CAP. Well said, scrivener; hast put ’em all in?—You
        shall hear now, my lord.
          FID. _In primis, the beauties of her mind, chastity,
        temperance, and, above all, patience_——
          CAP. You have bought a jewel, i’faith, my lord.—Nine and
        thirty, forty.                   [_Counting the money._
          FID. _Excellent in the best of music, in voice
        delicious, in conference wise and pleasing, of age
        contentful, neither too young to be apish, nor too old
        to be sottish_——
          CAP. You have bought as lovely a pennyworth, my lord, as
        e’er you bought in your life.
          PROD. Why should I buy her else, captain?
          FID. _And which is the best of a wife, a most
        comfortable sweet companion._
          CAP. I could not afford her so, i’faith, but that I am
        going to sea, and have need of money.
          FID. _A most comfortable sweet companion._
          PROD. What, again? the scrivener reads in passion.[843]
          FID. I read as the words move me; yet if that be a
        fault, it shall be seen no more:—_which said Madonna
        Castiza lying and yet being in the occupation of the
        said captain_——
          CAP. Nineteen—[_counting the money_]—occupation?
        Pox on’t, out with occupation; a captain is of no
        occupation, man.
          PHŒ. Nor thou of no religion.               [_Aside._
          FID. Now I come to the _habendum_,—_to have and to hold,
        use, and_——
          CAP. Use? put out use too, for shame, till we are all
        gone, I prithee.
          FID. _And to be acquitted of and from all former
        bargains, former sales_——
          CAP. Former sales?—nine and twenty, thirty—[_counting
        the money_]—by my troth, my lord, this is the first time
        that ever I sold her.
          PROD. Yet the writing must run so, captain.
          CAP. Let it run on then,—nine and forty, fifty.
         [_Counting the money._
          FID. _Former sales, gifts, grants, surrenders, re-
        entries_——
          CAP. For re-entries I will not swear for her.
          FID. _And furthermore, I the said, of and for the
        consideration of the sum of five hundred crowns to set
        me aboard, before these presents, utterly disclaim for
        ever any title, estate, right, interest, demand, or
        possession in or to the said Madonna Castiza, my late
        virtuous and unfortunate wife_——
          PHŒ. Unfortunate indeed! that was well plac’d.
                       [_Aside._
          FID. _As also neither to touch, attempt, molest, or
        incumber any part or parts whatsoever, either to be
        named or not to be named, either hidden or unhidden,
        either those that boldly look abroad, or those that dare
        not shew their face[s]_——
          CAP. Faces? I know what you mean by faces: scrivener,
        there’s a great figure in faces.
          FID. _In witness whereof, I the said captain have
        interchangeably set to my hand and seal, in presence of
        all these, the day and date above written._
          CAP. Very good, sir; I’ll be ready for you
        presently—four hundred and twenty, one, two, three,
        four, five.               [_Counting the money._
          PHŒ. Of all deeds yet this strikes the deepest wound
        Into my apprehension.
        Reverend and honourable Matrimony,[844]
        Mother of lawful sweets, unshamed mornings,
        Dangerless pleasures! thou that mak’st the bed
        Both pleasant and legitimately fruitful!
        Without thee,[845]
        All the whole world were soiled bastardy.
        Thou art the only and the greatest form
        That put’st a difference between our desires
        And the disorder’d appetites of beasts,
        Making their mates those that stand next their lusts.
        Then,—
        With what base injury is thy goodness paid!
        First, rare to have a bride commence a maid,
        But does beguile joy of the purity,
        And is made strict by power of drugs and art,
        An artificial maid, a doctor’d virgin,
        And so deceives the glory of his bed;
        A foul contempt against the spotless power
        Of sacred wedlock! But if chaste and honest,
        There is another devil haunts marriage—
        None fondly loves but knows it—jealousy,
        That wedlock’s[846] yellow sickness,
        That whispering separation every minute,
        And thus the curse takes his effect or progress.
        The most of men in their first sudden furies
        Rail at the narrow bounds of marriage,
        And call’t a prison; then it is most just,
        That the disease a’ th’ prison, jealousy,
        Should still affect a’m.[847] But O! here I am fix’d,
        To make sale of a wife, monstrous and foul,
        An act abhorr’d in nature, cold in soul:
        Who that has man in him could so resign
        To make his shame the posy to the coin?
          CAP. Right, i’faith, my lord; fully five hundred.
          PROD. I said how you should find it, captain; and with
        this competent sum you rest amply contented?
          CAP. Amply contented.
          FID. Here’s the pen, captain: your name to the sale.
          CAP. ’S foot, dost take me to be a penman? I protest I
        could ne’er write more than A B C, those three letters,
        in my life.
          FID. Why, those will serve, captain.
          CAP. I could ne’er get further.
          PHŒ. Would you have got further than A B C? Ah, base
        captain! that’s far enough, i’faith.
          FID. Take the seal off, captain.
          CAP. It goes on hardly, and comes off easily.
          PHŒ. Ay, just like a coward.
          FID. Will you write witness, gentleman?
          CAP. He? he shall. Prithee, come and set thy hand for
        witness, rogue: thou shalt venture with me?
          PHŒ. Nay, then I ha’ reason, captain, that commands me.
                                                      [_Writes._
          CAP. What a fair fist the pretty whorson writes, as if
        he had had manners and bringing up! A farmer’s son! his
        father damns himself to sell musty corn, while he
        ventures the money: ’twill prosper well at sea, no
        doubt; he shall ne’er see’t again.
          FID. So, captain, you deliver this as your deed?
          CAP. As my deed; what else, sir?
          PHŒ. The ugliest deed that e’er mine eye did witness.
                                                       [_Aside._
          CAP. So, my lord, you have her; clip[848] her, enjoy
        her; she’s your own: and let me be proud to tell you
        now, my lord, she’s as good a soul if a man had a mind
        to live honest and keep a wench, the kindest, sweetest,
        comfortablest rogue——
          PROD. Hark in thine ear,—
        The baser slave art thou; and so I’ll tell her:
        I love the pearl thou sold’st, hate thee the seller.
        Go to sea; the end of thee—is lousy.
          CAP. This [is] fine work! a very brave end, hum——
          PROD. Well thought upon, this scrivener may furnish
             me.                     _Whispers_ FIDELIO.
          PHŒ. Why should this fellow be a lord by birth,
        Being by blood a knave, one that would sell
        His lordship if he lik’d her ladyship?         [_Aside._
          FID. Yes, my lord.
          PHŒ. What’s here now?
          PROD. I have employment for a trusty fellow,
        Bold, sure,—
          FID. What if he be a knave, my lord?
          PROD. There thou com’st to me: why, he should be so;
        And men of your quill are not unacquainted.
          FID. Indeed all[849] our chief living, my lord, is by
        fools and knaves; we could not keep open shop else;
        fools that enter into bonds, and knaves that bind ’em.
          PROD. Why, now we meet.
          FID. And, as my memory happily leads me, I know a fellow
        of a standing estate, never flowing:
         I durst convey treason into his bosom,
        And keep it safe nine years.
          PROD. A goodly time.
          FID. And if need were, would press to an attempt,
        And cleave to desperate action.
          PROD. That last fits me;
        Thou hast the measure right: look I hear from thee.
          FID. With duteous speed.
          PROD. Expect a large reward.—
        I will find time of her to find regard.        [_Exit._
          CAP. The end of me is lousy!
          FID. O my lord, I have strange words to tell you!
          PHŒ. Stranger yet?
        I’ll choose some other hour to listen to thee;
        I am yet sick of this. Discover quickly.[850]
          FID. Why, will you make yourself known, my lord?
          PHŒ. Ay:
        Who scourgeth sin let him do’t dreadfully.
          CAP. Pox of his dissemblance! I will to sea.
          PHŒ. Nay, you shall to sea, thou wouldst poison the
        whole land else. [_Aside._]—Why, how now, captain?
          CAP. In health.
          FID. What, drooping?
          PHŒ. Or ashamed of the sale of thine own wife?
          CAP. You might count me an ass then, i’faith.
          PHŒ. If not ashamed of that, what can you be ashamed of
        then?
          CAP. Prithee ha’ done; I am ashamed of nothing.
          PHŒ. I easily believe that.                 [_Aside._
          CAP. This lord sticks in my stomach.
          PHŒ. How? take one of thy feathers down, and fetch him
        up.
          FID. I’d make him come.
          PHŒ. But what if the duke should hear of this?
          FID. Ay, or your son-in-law Fidelio know[851] of the
        sale of his mother?
          CAP. What and[852] they did? I sell none but mine own.
        As for the duke, he’s abroad by this time; and for
        Fidelio, he’s in labour.
          PHŒ. He in labour?
          CAP. What call you travelling?
          PHŒ. That’s true: but let me tell you, captain, whether
        the duke hear on’t, or Fidelio know on’t, or both, or
        neither, ’twas a most filthy, loathsome part——
          FID. A base, unnatural deed——
              [_They discover themselves, and lay hands on him._
          CAP. Slave, and fool——Ha, who? O!——
          PHŒ. Thou hateful villain! thou shouldst choose to
             sink,
        To keep thy baseness shrouded.

                            _Enter_ CASTIZA.

          FID. Ugly wretch!
          CAS. Who hath laid violence upon my husband,
        My dear sweet captain? Help!
          PHŒ. Lady, you wrong your value:
        Call you him dear that has sold you so cheap?
          CAS. I do beseech your pardon, good my lord.
                                                      [_Kneels._
          PHŒ. Rise.
          FID. My abused mother!
          CAS. My kind son!
        Whose liking I neglected in this match.
          FID. Not that alone, but your far happier fortunes.
          CAP. Is this the scrivener and the farmer’s son?
        Fire on his lordship! he told me they travell’d.
          PHŒ. And see the sum told out to buy that jewel,
        More precious in a woman than her eye,
        Her honour.—
        Nay, take it to you, lady; and I judge it
        Too slight a recompense for your great wrong,
        But that his riddance helps it.
          CAP. ’S foot, he undoes me! I’m[853] a rogue and a
             beggar:
        The Egyptian plague creeps over me already;
        I begin to be lousy.
          PHŒ. Thus happily prevented, you’re set free,
        Or else made over to adultery.
          CAS. To heaven and to you my modest thanks.
          PHŒ. Monster, to sea! spit thy abhorred foam
        Where it may do least harm; there’s air and room;
        Thou’rt dangerous in a chamber, virulent venom
        Unto a lady’s name and her chaste breath.
        If past this evening’s verge the dukedom hold thee,
        Thou art reserv’d for abject punishment.
          CAP. I do beseech your good lordship, consider the state
        of a poor downcast captain.
          PHŒ. Captain? off with that noble title! thou becomest
        it vildly;[854] I ne’er saw the name fit worse: I’ll
        sooner allow a pander a captain than thee.
          CAP. More’s the pity.
          PHŒ. Sue to thy lady for pardon.
          CAS. I give it without suit.
          CAP. I do beseech your ladyship not so much for
        pardon, as to bestow a few of those crowns upon a
        poor unfeathered rover, that will as truly pray
        for you,—and wish you hanged, [_aside_]—as any man
        breathing.
          CAS. I give it freely all.
          PHŒ. Nay, by your favour;
        I will contain[855] you, lady.—Here, be gone:
        Use slaves like slaves: wealth keeps their faults
           unknown.
          CAP. Well, I’m yet glad I’ve liberty and these:
        The land has plagu’d me, and I’ll plague the seas.
                         [_Exit._
          PHŒ. The scene is clear’d, the bane of brightness
             fled;
        Who sought the death of honour is struck dead.—
        Come, modest lady.
          FID. My most honest mother!
          PHŒ. Thy virtue shall live safe from reach of shames:
        That act ends nobly preserves ladies’ fames.
                             [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                      _A Room in_ FALSO’s _House_.

             _Enter_ FALSO, KNIGHT, _and_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.

          FAL. Why, this is but the second time of your coming,
        kinsman; visit me oftener.—Daughter, I charge you bring
        this gentleman along with you:—gentleman! I cry ye
        mercy, sir; I call you gentleman still; I forget you’re
        but a knight; you must pardon me, sir.
          KNIGHT. For your worship’s kindness—worship! I cry you
        mercy, sir; I call you worshipful still; I forget you’re
        but a justice.
          FAL. I am no more, i’faith.
          KNIGHT. You must pardon me, sir.
          FAL. ’Tis quickly done, sir: you see I make bold with
        you, kinsman, thrust my daughter and you into one
        chamber.
          KNIGHT. Best of all, sir: kindred you know may lie any
        where.
          FAL. True, true, sir.—Daughter, receive your blessing:
        take heed the coach jopper not too much; have a care to
        the fruits of your body.—Look to her, kinsman.
          KNIGHT. Fear it not, sir.
          JEW. WIFE. Nay, father, though I say it, that should not
        say it, he looks to me more like a husband than a
        kinsman.
          FAL. I hear good commendations of you, sir.
          KNIGHT. You hear the worst of me, I hope, sir: I salute
        my leave, sir.
          FAL. You’re welcome all over your body, sir. [_Exeunt_
        KNIGHT _and_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.]—Nay, I can behave myself
        courtly, though I keep house i’ th’ country. What, does
        my niece hide herself? not present, ha?—Latronello.

                          _Enter_ LATRONELLO.

          LAT. Sir.
          FAL. Call my niece to me.
          LAT. Yes, sir.                              [_Exit._
          FAL. A foolish, coy, bashful thing it is; she’s afraid
        to lie with her own uncle: I’d do her no harm, i’faith.
        I keep myself a widower a’ purpose, yet the foolish girl
        will not look into’t: she should have all, i’faith; she
        knows I have but a time, cannot hold long. See, where
        she comes.

                             _Enter_ NIECE.

        Pray, who[856] am I, niece?
          NIECE. I hope you’re yourself,
        Uncle to me, and brother to my father.
          FAL. O, am I so? it does not appear so, for
        surely you would love your father’s brother for
        your father’s sake, your uncle for your own sake.
          NIECE. I do so.
          FAL. Nay, you do nothing, niece.
          NIECE. In that love which becomes you best I love you.
          FAL. How should I know that love becomes me best?
          NIECE. Because ’tis chaste and honourable.
          FAL. Honourable? it cannot become me then, niece,
        For I’m scarce worshipful. Is this an age
        To entertain bare love without the fruits?
        When I receiv’d thee first, I look’d
        Thou shouldst have been a wife unto my house,
        And sav’d me from the charge of marriage.
         Do you think your father’s five thousand pound would
        ha’ made me take you else? no, you should ne’er ha’[857]
        been a charge to me. As far as I can perceive yet by
        you, I’ve as much need to marry as e’er I had: would not
        this be a great grief to your friends, think you, if
        they were alive again?
          NIECE. ’Twould be a grief indeed.
          FAL. You have[858] confess’d,
        All about house, that young Fidelio,
        Who in his travels does attend the prince,
        Is your vow’d love.
          NIECE. Most true, he’s my vow’d husband.
          FAL. And what’s a husband? Is not a husband a stranger
        at first? and will you lie with a stranger before you
        lie with your own uncle? Take heed what ye do, niece: I
        counsel you for the best. Strangers are drunken fellows,
        I can tell you; they will come home late a’ nights, beat
        their wives, and get nothing but girls: look to’t; if
        you marry, your stubbornness is your dowry: five
        thousand crowns were bequeathed to you, true, if you
        marry with my consent; but if e’er you go to marrying by
        my consent, I’ll go to hanging by yours: go to, be wise,
        and love your uncle.
          NIECE. I should have cause then to repent indeed.
        Do you so far forget the offices
        Of blushing modesty? Uncles are half fathers;
        Why, they come so near our bloods, they’re e’en part of
           it.
          FAL. Why, now you come to me, niece: if your uncle be
        part of your own flesh and blood, is it not then fit
        your own flesh and blood should come nearest to you?
        answer me to that, niece.
          NIECE. You do allude all to incestuous will,
        Nothing to modest purpose. Turn me forth;
        Be like an uncle of these latter days,
        Perjur’d enough, enough unnatural;
        Play your executorship in tyranny,
        Restrain my fortunes, keep me poor,—I care not.
        In this alone most women I’ll excel,
        I’ll rather yield to beggary than to hell.     [_Exit._
          FAL. Very good; a’ my troth, my niece is valiant: sh’as
        made me richer by five thousand crowns, the price of her
        dowry. Are you so honest? I do not fear but I shall have
        the conscience to keep you poor enough, niece, or else I
        am quite altered a’ late.

                          _Enter_ LATRONELLO.

        The news, may it please you, sir?
          LAT. Sir, there’s an old fellow, a kind of law-driver,
        entreats conference with your worship.
          FAL. A law-driver? prithee, drive him hither.
                                             [_Exit_ LATRONELLO.

                            _Enter_ TANGLE.

          TAN. No, no, I say; if it be for defect of
        apparance,[859] take me out a special _significavit_.
          SUITOR[860] [_within._] Very good, sir.
          TAN. Then if he purchase an _alias_ or _capias_,
        which are writs of custom, only to delay time, your
        _procedendo_ does you knight’s service—that’s nothing at
        all; get your _distringas_ out as soon as you can for a
        jury.
          SUIT. [_within_] I’ll attend your good[861] worship’s
        coming out.
          TAN. Do, I prithee, attend me; I’ll take it kindly, _a
        voluntate_.
          FAL. What, old signior Tangle!
          TAN. I am in debt to your worship’s remembrance.
          FAL. My old master of fence! come, come, come, I have
        not exercised this twelve moons; I have almost forgot
        all my law-weapons.
          TAN. They are under fine and recovery; your worship
        shall easily recover them.
          FAL. I hope so.—When,[862] there?

                          _Enter_ LATRONELLO.

          LAT. Sir?
          FAL. The rapier and dagger foils instantly.—[_Exit_
        LATRONELLO.]—And what’s thy suit to me, old Tangle?
        I’ll grant it presently.
          TAN. Nothing but this, sir; to set your worship’s hand
        to the commendation of a knave whom nobody speaks well
        on.
          FAL. The more shame for ’em: what was his offence, I
        pray?
          TAN. _Vestras deducite culpas_; nothing but robbing a
        vestry.
          FAL. What, what? alas, poor knave! Give me the paper. He
        did but save the churchwardens a labour: come, come, he
        has done a better deed in’t than the parish is aware of,
        to prevent[863] the knaves; he robs but seldom, they
        once a quarter: methinks ’twere a part of good justice
        to hang ’em at year’s end, when they come out of their
        office, to the true terrifying of all collectors and
        sidemen.[864]
          TAN. Your worship would make a fruitful commonwealth’s
        man: the constable lets ’em alone, looks on, and says
        nothing.
          FAL. Alas, good man! he lets ’em alone for quietness-
        sake, and takes half a share with ’em: they know well
        enough too he has an impediment in his tongue; he’s
        always drunk when he should speak.
          TAN. Indeed, your worship speaks true in that, sir: they
        blind him with beer, and make him so narrow-eyed, that
        he winks naturally at all their knaveries.
          FAL. So, so; here’s my hand to his commendations.
                                             [_Signs the paper._
          TAN. _A caritate_, you do a charitable deed in’t, sir.
          FAL. Nay, if it be but a vestry matter, visit me at any
        time, old Signior Law-thistle.

        _Re-enter_ LATRONELLO _with rapier and dagger foils, and
                              then exit_.

        O well done! here are the foils: come, come, sir;
        I’ll try a law-bout with you.
          TAN. I am afraid I shall overthrow you, sir, i’faith.
          FAL. ’Tis but for want of use then, sir.
          TAN. Indeed, that same odd word, use, makes a man a good
        lawyer, and a woman an arrant——tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh, tuh!
        Now am I for you, sir: but first to bring you into form;
        can your worship name all your weapons?
          FAL. That I can, I hope. Let me see: Longsword, what’s
        Longsword? I am so dulled with doing justice, that I
        have forgot all, i’faith.
          TAN. Your Longsword, that’s _a writ of delay_.
          FAL. Mass, that sword’s long enough, indeed; I ha’ known
        it reach the length of fifteen terms.
          TAN. Fifteen terms? that’s but a short sword.
          FAL. Methinks ’tis long enough: proceed, sir.
          TAN. _A writ of delay_, Longsword; _scandala
        magnatum_,[865] Backsword.
          FAL. Scandals are backswords indeed.
          TAN. _Capias cominus_, Case of Rapiers.
          FAL. O desperate!
          TAN. A _latitat_, Sword and Dagger; _a writ of
        execution_, Rapier and Dagger.[866]
          FAL. Thou art come to our present weapon: but what call
        you Sword and Buckler, then?
          TAN. O, that’s out of use now! Sword and Buckler was
        called _a good conscience_, but that weapon’s left long
        ago: that was too manly a fight, too sound a weapon for
        these our days. ’Slid, we are scarce able to lift up a
        buckler now, our arms are so bound to the pox; one good
        bang upon a buckler would make most of our gentlemen fly
        a’ pieces: ’tis not for these linty times: our lawyers
        are good rapier and dagger men; they’ll quickly despatch
        your—money.
          FAL. Indeed, since sword and buckler time, I have
        observed there has been nothing so much fighting: where
        be all our gallant swaggerers? there are no good frays
        a’ late.
          TAN. O, sir, the property’s altered; you shall see less
        fighting every day than other; for every one gets him a
        mistress, and she gives him wounds enow; and you know
        the surgeons cannot be here and there too: if there were
        red wounds too, what would become of the Reinish[867]
        wounds?
          FAL. Thou sayst true, i’faith; they would be but ill-
        favouredly looked to then.
          TAN. Very well, sir.
          FAL. I expect you, sir.
          TAN. I lie in this court for you, sir; my Rapier is my
        attorney, and my Dagger his clerk.
          FAL. Your attorney wants a little oiling, methinks; he
        looks very rustily.
          TAN. ’Tis but his proper colour, sir; his father was an
        ironmonger; he will ne’er look brighter, the rust has so
        eat into him; has never any leisure to be made clean.
          FAL. Not in the vacation?
          TAN. _Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi._[868]
          FAL. Then Jove will not be at leisure to scour him,
        because he ne’er came to him before.
          TAN. You’re excellent at it, sir: and now you least
        think on’t, I arrest you, sir.
          FAL. Very good, sir.
          TAN. Nay, very bad, sir, by my faith: I follow you
        still, as the officers will follow you, as long as you
        have a penny.
          FAL. You speak sentences, sir: by this time have I tried
        my friends, and now I thrust in bail.
          TAN. This bail will not be taken, sir; they must be two
        citizens that are no cuckolds.
          FAL. Byrlady,[869] then I’m like to lie by it; I had
        rather ’twere a hundred that were.
          TAN. Take heed I bring you not to an _nisi prius_, sir.
          FAL. I must ward myself as well as I may, sir.
          TAN. ’Tis court-day now; _declarat atturnatus_, my
        attorney gapes for money.
          FAL. You shall have no advantage yet; I put in my
        answer.
          TAN.[870] I follow the suit still, sir.
          FAL. I like not this court, byrlady: I take me out a
        writ of remove; a writ of remove, do you see, sir?
          TAN. Very well, sir.
          FAL. And place my cause higher.
          TAN. There you started me, sir: yet for all your demurs,
        _pluries_, and _sursurraras_,[871] which are all
        Longswords,[872] that’s delays, all the comfort is, in
        nine years a man may overthrow you.
          FAL. You must thank your good friends then, sir.
          TAN. Let nine years pass, five hundred crowns cast away
        a’ both sides, and the suit not twenty, my counsellor’s
        wife must have another hood, you know, and my attorney’s
        wife will have a new forepart; yet see at length law, I
        shall have law: now, beware, I bring you to a narrow
        exigent, and by no means can you avoid the proclamation.
          FAL. O!
          TAN. Now follows a writ of execution; a _capias
        utlagatum_ gives you a wound mortal, trips up your
        heels, and lays you i’ th’ counter.  [_Overthrows him._
          FAL. O villain!
          TAN. I cry your worship heartily mercy, sir; I thought
        we had been in law together, _adversarius contra
        adversarium_, by my troth.
          FAL. O, reach me thy hand! I ne’er had such an overthrow
        in my life.
          TAN. ’Twas ’long of your attorney there; he might a’
        stayed the execution of _capias utlagatum_, and removed
        you, with a _supersedeas non molestandum_, into the
        court of equity.
          FAL. Pox on him, he fell out of my hand when I had most
        need of him.
          TAN. I was bound to follow the suit, sir.
          FAL. Thou couldst do no less than overthrow me, I must
        needs say so.
          TAN. You had recovered cost else, sir.
          FAL. And now, by th’[873] mass, I think I shall hardly
        recover without cost.
          TAN. Nay, that’s _certo scio_, an execution is very
        chargeable.
          FAL. Well, it shall teach me wit as long as I am a
        justice. I perceive by this trial, if a man have a sound
        fall in law, he[874] shall feel it in his bones all his
        life after.
          TAN. Nay, that’s _recto_ upon record; for I myself was
        overthrown in 88 by a tailor, and I have had a stitch in
        my side ever since,—O!                  [_Exeunt._[875]




                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                      _A Hall in_ FALSO’s _House_.

                       _Enter_ FALSO _untrussed_.

          FAL. Why, Latronello! Furtivo! Fucato! Where be these
        lazy knaves that should truss me?[876] not one stirring
        yet?
          [_A Cry within._] Follow, follow, follow!
          FAL. What news there?
          [_A Cry within._] This way, this way; follow, follow!
          FAL. Hark, you sluggish soporiferous villains! there’s
        knaves abroad when you are a-bed: are ye not ashamed
        on’t? a justice’s men should be up first, and give
        example to[877] all knaves.

        _Enter_ LATRONELLO _and_ FUCATO, _tumbling in, in false
                                beards_.

          LAT. O, I beseech your good worship!
          FUC. Your worshipful worship!
          FAL. Thieves! my two-hand sword! I’m robbed i’ th’ hall.
        Latronello, knaves, come down! my two-hand sword, I say!
          LAT. I am Latronello, I beseech your worship.
          FAL. Thou Latronello? thou liest; my men scorn to have
        beards.
          LAT. We forget our beards. [_They take off their false
        beards._]—Now, I beseech your worship quickly remember
        us.
          FAL. How now?
          FUC. Nay, there’s no time to talk of _how now_; ’tis
        done.
          [_A Cry within._] Follow, follow, follow!
          LAT. Four mark and a livery is not able to keep life and
        soul together: we must fly out once a quarter; ’tis for
        your worship’s credit to have money in our purse. Our
        fellow Furtivo is taken in the action.
          FAL. A pox on him for a lazy knave! would he be taken?
          FUC. They bring him along to your worship; you’re the
        next justice. Now or never shew yourself a good master,
        an upright magistrate, and deliver him out of their
        hands.
          FAL. Nay, he shall find me—apt enough to do him good, I
        warrant him.
          LAT. He comes in a false beard, sir.
          FAL. ’S foot, what should he do here else? there’s no
        coming to me in a true one, if he had one. The slave to
        be taken! do not I keep geldings swift enough?
          LAT. The goodliest geldings of any gentleman in the
        shire.
          FAL. Which did the whorson knave ride upon?
          LAT. Upon one of your best, sir.
          FUC. Stand-and-deliver.
          FAL. Upon Stand-and-deliver? the very gelding I choose
        for mine own riding; as nimble as Pegasus the flying
        horse yonder. Go shift yourselves into your coats; bring
        hither a great chair and a little table.
          FUC. With all present speed, sir.
          FAL. And, Latronello——
          LAT. Ay, sir.
          FAL. Sit you down, and very soberly take the
        examination.
          LAT. I’ll draw a few horse-heads in a paper; make a
        shew. I hope I shall keep my countenance.
                              [_Exeunt_ LATRONELLO _and_ FUCATO.
          FAL. Pox on him again! would he be taken? he frets me. I
        have been a youth myself: I ha’ seen the day I could
        have told money out of other men’s purses,—mass, so I
        can do now,—nor will I keep that fellow about me that
        dares not bid a man stand; for as long as drunkenness is
        a vice, stand is a virtue: but I would not have ’em
        taken. I remember now betimes in a morning, I would have
        peeped through the green boughs, and have had the party
        presently, and then to ride away finely in fear: ’twas
        e’en venery[878] to me, i’faith, the pleasantest course
        of life! one would think every woodcock a constable, and
        every owl an officer. But those days are past with me;
        and, a’ my troth, I think I am a greater thief now, and
        in no danger. I can take my ease, sit in my chair, look
        in your faces now, and rob you; make you bring your
        money by authority, put off your hat, and thank me for
        robbing of you. O, there is nothing to a thief under
        covert barn![879]

          _Enter_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO; _Constable and Officers
              with_ FURTIVO; _and_ LATRONELLO _and_ FUCATO
              _bringing in a chair and table_.

          CON. Come, officers, bring him away.
          FAL. Nay, I see thee through thy false beard, thou
        midwind-chined rascal, [_Aside._]—How now, my masters,
        what’s he? ha?
          CON. Your worship knows I never come but I bring a thief
        with me.
          FAL. Thou hast left thy wont else, constable.
          PHŒ. Sir, we understand you to be the only uprightness
        of this place.
          FAL. But I scarce understand you, sir.
          PHŒ. Why, then, you understand not yourself, sir.
          FAL. Such another word, and you shall change places with
        the thief.
          PHŒ. A maintainer of equal causes, I mean.
          FAL. Now I have you; proceed, sir.
          PHŒ. This gentleman and myself, being led hither by
        occasion of business, have been offered the discourtesy
        of the country, set upon by three thieves, and robbed.
          FAL. What are become of the other two?—Latronello.[880]
          LAT. Here, sir.

          PHŒ. They both made away from us; the cry pursues ’em,
        but as yet none but this taken.
          FAL. Latronello.
          LAT. Sir?
          FAL. Take his examination.
          LAT. Yes, sir.
          FAL. Let the knave stand single.
          FUR. Thank your good worship.
          FAL. Has been a suitor at court, sure; he thanks me for
        nothing.
          PHŒ. He’s a thief now, sure.
          FAL. That we must know of him.—What are ye, sir?
          FUR. A piece next to the tail, sir, a servingman.
          FAL. By my troth, a pretty phrase, and very cleanly
        handled! Put it down, Latronello; thou mayst make use
        on’t.—Is he of honour or worship whom thou servest?
          FUR. Of both, dear sir; honourable in mind, and
        worshipful in body.
          FAL. Why, would one wish a man to speak better?
          PHŒ. O, sir, they most commonly speak best that do
        worst.
          FAL. Say you so, sir? then we’ll try him farther.—Does
        your right worshipful master go before you as an
        ensample of vice, and so encourage you to this
        slinking[881] iniquity? He is not a lawyer, is he?
          FUR. Has the more wrong, sir; both for his conscience
        and honesty he deserves to be one.
          FAL. Pity he’s a thief, i’faith; I should entertain him
        else.
          PHŒ. Ay, if he were not as he is, he would be better
        than himself.
          FUR. No, ’tis well known, sir, I have a master the very
        picture of wisdom——
          LAT. For indeed he speaks not one wise word.
                                                       [_Aside._
          FUR. And no man but will admire to hear of his virtues——
          LAT. Because he ne’er had any in all his life.
                                                       [_Aside._
          FAL. You write all down, Latronello?
          LAT. I warrant you, sir.
          FUR. So sober, so discreet, so judicious——
          FAL. Hum.
          FUR. And above all, of most reverend gravity.
          FAL. I like him for one quality; he speaks well of his
        master; he will fare the better.—Now, sir, let me touch
        you.
          FUR. Ay, sir.
          FAL. Why, serving a gentleman of such worship and
        wisdom, such sobriety and virtue, such discretion and
        judgment, as your master is, do you take such a
        beastly course, to stop horses, hinder gentlewomen
        from their meetings, and make citizens never ride but
        a’ Sundays, only to avoid morning prayer and you? Is
        it because your worshipful master feeds you with lean
        spits, pays you with Irish money, or clothes you in
        northern dozens?[882]
          FUR. Far be it from his mind, or my report. ’Tis well
        known he kept worshipful cheer the day of his wife’s
        burial; pays our four marks a-year as duly by twelve
        pence a-quarter as can be——
          PHŒ. His wisdom swallows it.                [_Aside._
          FUR. And for northern dozens—fie, fie, we were ne’er
        troubled with so many.
          FAL. Receiving then such plenteous blessings from your
        virtuous and bountiful master, what cause have you to be
        thief now? answer me to that gear.[883]
          FUR. ’Tis e’en as a man gives his mind to’t, sir.
          FAL. How, sir?
          FUR. For, alas, if the whole world were but of one
        trade, traffic were nothing! if we were all true
        men,[884] we should be of no trade: what a pitiful world
        would here be! heaven forbid we should be all true men!
        Then how should your worship’s next suit be made? not a
        tailor left in the land: of what stuff would you have it
        made? not a merchant left to deliver it: would your
        worship go in that suit still? You would ha’ more
        thieves about you than those you have banished, and be
        glad to call the great ones home again, to destroy the
        little.
          PHŒ. A notable rogue!
          FAL. A’ my troth, a fine knave, and has answered me
        gloriously.—What wages wilt thou take after thou art
        hanged?
          FUR. More than your worship’s able to give: I would
        think foul scorn to be a justice then.
          FAL. He says true too, i’faith; for we are all full of
        corruption here. [_Aside._]—Hark you, my friends.
          PHŒ. Sir?
          FAL. By my troth, if you were no crueller than I, I
        could find in my heart to let him go.
          PHŒ. Could you so, sir? the more pitiful justice you.
          FAL. Nay, I did but to try you; if you have no pity,
        I’ll ha’ none.—Away! he’s a thief; to prison with him!
          FUR. I am content, sir.
          FAL. Are you content?—Bring him back.—Nay then, you
        shall not go.—I’ll be as cruel as you can wish.—You’re
        content? belike you have a trick to break prison, or a
        bribe for the officers.
          CON. For us, sir?
          FAL. For you, sir! what colour’s silver, I pray? you
        ne’er saw money in your life: I’ll not trust you with
        him.—Latronello and Fucato, lay hold upon him; to your
        charge I commit him.
          FUR. O, I beseech you, sir!
          FAL. Nay, if I must be cruel, I will be cruel.
          FUR. Good sir, let me rather go to prison.
          FAL. You desire that? I’ll trust no prison with you:
        I’ll make you lie in mine own house, or I’ll know why I
        shall not.
          FUR. Merciful sir!
          FAL. Since you have no pity, I will be cruel.
          PHŒ. Very good, sir; you please us well.
          FAL. You shall appear to-morrow, sirs.
          FUR. Upon my knees, sir!
          FAL. You shall be hanged out a’ th’ way.—Away with him,
        Latronello and Fucato!—Officers, I discharge you my
        house; I like not your company.
         Report me as you see me, fire and fuel;
        If men be Jews, justices must be cruel.
                         [_Exeunt all but_ PHŒNIX _and_ FIDELIO.
          PHŒ. So, sir, extremes set off all actions thus,
        Either too tame, or else too tyrannous:
        He being bent to fury, I doubt now
        We shall not gain access unto your love,
        Or she to us.
          FID. Most wishfully here she comes.

                             _Enter_ NIECE.

          PHŒ. Is that she?
          FID. This is she, my lord.
          PHŒ. A modest presence.
          FID. Virtue bless you, lady!
          NIECE. You wish me well, sir.
          FID. I’d first in charge this kiss, and next this
             paper;
        You’ll know the language; ’tis Fidelio’s.
          NIECE. My ever-vowed love! how is his health?
          FID. As fair as is his favour with the prince.
          NIECE. I’m sick with joy: does the prince love him so?
          FID. His life cannot requite it.
        Not to wrong the remembrance of his love,
        I had a token for you, kept it safe,
        Till by misfortune of the way this morning,
        Thieves set upon this gentleman and myself,
        And with the rest robb’d that.
          NIECE. Was it your loss?[885]
        O me, I’m dearly sorry for your chance!
        They boldly look you in the face that robb’d you;
        No farther villains than my uncle’s men.
          PHŒ. What, lady?
          NIECE. ’Tis my grief I speak so true.
          FID. Why, my lord[886]——
          PHŒ. But give me pausing, lady; was he one
        That took th’ examination?
          NIECE. One, and the chief.
          PHŒ. Henceforth hang him that is no way a thief;
        Then I hope few will suffer.
        Nay, all the jest was, he committed him
        To the charge of his fellows, and the rogue
        Made it lamentable, cried to leave ’em:
        None live so wise but fools may once deceive ’em.
          FID. An uncle so insatiate!
          PHŒ. Ay, is’t not strange too,
        That all should be by nature vicious,
        And he bad against nature?
          NIECE. Then you have heard the sum of all my wrongs?
          PHŒ. Lady, we have, and desire rather now
        To heal ’em than to hear ’em:
        For by a letter from Fidelio
        Direct to us, we are intreated jointly
        To hasten your remove from this foul den
        Of theft and purpos’d incest.
          NIECE. I rejoice
        In his chaste care of me: I’ll soon be furnish’d.
          FID. He writes that his return cannot be long.
          NIECE. I’m chiefly glad,—but whither is the place?
          PHŒ. To the safe seat of his late wronged mother.
          NIECE. I desire it;
        Her conference will fit mine: well you prevail.
          PHŒ. At next grove we’ll expect you.
          NIECE. I’ll not fail.                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                 _Enter_ KNIGHT _and_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.

          KNIGHT. It stands upon the frame of my reputation, I
        protest, lady.
          JEW. WIFE. Lady? that word is worth an hundred
        angels[887] at all times, for it cost more: if I live
        till to-morrow night, my sweet Pleasure, thou shalt have
        them.
          KNIGHT. Could you not make ’em a hundred and fifty,
        think you?
          JEW. WIFE. I’ll do my best endeavour to multiply, I
        assure you.
          KNIGHT. Could you not make ’em two hundred?
          JEW. WIFE. No, by my faith——
          KNIGHT. Peace; I’ll rather be confined in the hundred
        and fifty.
          JEW. WIFE. Come e’en much about this time, when taverns
        give up their ghosts, and gentlemen are in their first
        cast[888]——
          KNIGHT. I’ll observe the season.
          JEW. WIFE. And do but whirl the ring a’ th’ door once
        about: my maid-servant shall be taught to understand the
        language.
          KNIGHT. Enough, my sweet Revenue.
          JEW. WIFE. Good rest, my effectual Pleasure.
                                                 [_Exeunt._[889]




                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


        _A Street: before the Jeweller’s House, and the Court of
                                 Law._

                     _Enter_ PRODITOR _and_ PHŒNIX.

          PROD. Come hither, Phœnix.[890]
          PHŒ. What makes your honour break so early?
          PROD. A toy, I have a toy.[891]
          PHŒ. A toy, my lord?
          PROD. Before thou lay’st thy wrath upon the duke,
        Be advis’d.
          PHŒ. Ay, ay, I warrant you, my lord.
          PROD. Nay, give my words honour; hear me.
        I’ll strive to bring this act into such form
        And credit amongst men, they shall suppose,
        Nay, verily believe, the prince, his son,
        To be the plotter of his father’s murder.
          PHŒ. O that were infinitely admirable!
          PROD. Were’t not? it pleaseth me beyond my bliss.
        Then if his son meet death as he returns,
        Or by my hired instruments turn up,
        The general voice will cry, O happy vengeance!
          PHŒ. O blessed vengeance!
          PROD. Ay, I’ll turn my brain
        Into a thousand uses, tire my inventions,
        Make my blood sick with study, and mine eye
        More hollow than my heart, but I will fashion,
        Nay, I will fashion it. Canst counterfeit?
          PHŒ. The prince’s hand most[892] truly, most direct;
        You shall admire it.
          PROD. Necessary mischief,
        Next to a woman, but more close in secrets!
        Thou’rt all the kindred that my breast vouchsafes.
        Look into me anon: I must frame, and muse,
        And fashion.                                   [_Exit._
          PHŒ. ’Twas time to look into thee, in whose heart
        Treason grows ripe, and therefore fit to fall:
        That slave first sinks whose envy threatens all.
        Now is his venom at full height.      [_Voices within._
          FIRST VOICE. [_within_] Lying or being in the said
        county, in the tenure and occupation aforesaid.
          SECOND VOICE. [_within_] No more then; a writ of course
        upon the matter of——
          THIRD VOICE. [_within_] Silence!
          FOURTH VOICE. [_within_] O-o-o-o-yes! Carlo Turbulenzo,
        appear, or lose twenty mark in the suits.
          PHŒ. Hah, whither have my thoughts conveyed me?
        I am now
        Within the dizzy murmur of the law.

          FIRST VOICE. [_within_] So that then, the cause being
        found clear, upon the last citation——
          FOURTH VOICE. [_within_] Carlo Turbulenzo, come into the
        court.

              _Enter_ TANGLE _and two Suitors after him_.

          TAN. Now, now, now, now, now, upon my knees I praise
        Mercury, the god of law! I have two suits at issue, two
        suits at issue.
          FIRST SUIT. Do you hear, sir?
          TAN. I will not hear; I’ve other business.
          FIRST SUIT. I beseech you, my learned counsel——
          TAN. Beseech not me, beseech not me; I am a mortal man,
        a client as you are; beseech not me.
          FIRST SUIT. I would do all by your worship’s direction.
          TAN. Then hang thyself.
          SECOND SUIT. Shall I take out a special _supplicavit_?
          TAN. Mad me not, torment me not, tear me not; you’ll
        give me leave to hear mine own cause, mine own cause.
          FIRST VOICE. [_within_] Nay, moreover and farther——
          TAN. Well said, my lawyer, well said, well said!
          FIRST VOICE. [_within_] All the opprobrious speeches
        that man could invent, all malicious invectives, called
        wittol[893] to his face.
          TAN. That’s I, that’s I: thank you, my learned counsel,
        for your good remembrance. I hope I shall overthrow him
        horse and foot.[894]
          FIRST SUIT. Nay but, good sir——
          TAN. No more, sir: he that brings me happy news first
        I’ll relieve first.
          BOTH SUIT. Sound executions rot thy cause and thee!
                                                      [_Exeunt._
          TAN. Ay, ay, ay, pray so still, pray so still; they’ll
        thrive the better.
          PHŒ. I wonder how this fellow keeps out madness;
        What stuff his brains are made on.
          TAN. I suffer, I suffer, till I hear a judgment!
          PHŒ. What, old signior?
          TAN. Prithee, I will not know thee now; ’tis a busy
        time, a busy time with me.
          PHŒ. What, not me, signior?
          TAN. O, cry thee mercy! give me thy hand—fare thee
        well.—Has no relief again[895] me then; his demurs will
        not help him; his sursurraras[896] will but play the
        knaves with him.

                             _Enter_ FALSO.

          PHŒ. The justice? ’tis he.
          FAL. Have I found thee, i’faith? I thought where I
        should smell thee out, old Tangle.
          TAN. What, old signior justicer? embrace me another time
        and[897] you can possible:—how do[898] all thy wife’s
        children,—well? that’s well said, i’faith.
          FAL. Hear me, old Tangle.
          TAN. Prithee, do not ravish me; let me go.
          FAL. I must use some of thy counsel first.
          TAN. Sirrah, I ha’ brought him to an exigent: hark!
        that’s my cause, that’s my cause yonder: I twinged him,
        I twinged him.
          FAL. My niece is stolen away.
          TAN. Ah, get me a _ne exeat regno_ quickly! nay, you
        must not stay upon’t; I’d fain have you gone.
          FAL. A _ne exeat regno_? I’ll about it presently: adieu.
                                                        [_Exit._
          PHŒ. You seek to catch her, justice; she’ll catch you.

                        _Re-enter_ FIRST SUITOR.

          FIRST SUIT. A judgment, a judgment!
          TAN. What, what, what?
          FIRST SUIT. Overthrown, overthrown, overthrown!
          TAN. Ha?—ah, ah!——

                       _Re-enter_ SECOND SUITOR.

          SECOND SUIT. News, news, news!
          TAN. The devil, the devil, the devil!
          SECOND SUIT. Twice Tangle’s overthrown, twice Tangle’s
        overthrown!
          TAN. Hold!
          PHŒ. Now, old cheater of the law——
          TAN. Pray, give me leave to be mad.
          PHŒ. Thou that hast found such sweet pleasure[899] in
        the vexation of others——
          TAN. May I not be mad in quiet?
          PHŒ. Very marrow, very manna to thee to be in law——
          TAN. Very syrup of toads and preserved adders!
          PHŒ. Thou that hast vexed and beggared the whole parish,
        and made the honest churchwardens go to law with the
        poor’s money——
          TAN. Hear me, do but hear me! I pronounce a terrible,
        horrible curse upon you all, and wish you to my
        attorney. See where a _præmunire_ comes, a _dedimus
        potestatem_, and that most dreadful execution,
        _excommunicato capiendo_! There’s no bail to be taken; I
        shall rot in fifteen jails: make dice of my bones, and
        let my counsellor’s son play away his father’s money
        with ’em; may my bones revenge my quarrel! A _capias
        cominus_? here, here, here, here; quickly dip your
        quills in my blood, off with my skin, and write fourteen
        lines of a side. There’s an honest conscionable fellow;
        he takes but ten shillings of a bellows-mender: here’s
        another deals all with charity; you shall give him
        nothing, only his wife an embroidered petticoat, a gold
        fringe for her tail, or a border for her head. Ah,
        sirrah, you shall catch me no more in the springe of
        your knaveries!                                [_Exit._
          FIRST SUIT. Follow, follow him still; a little thing
        now sets him forward.                [_Exeunt_ SUITORS.
          PHŒ. None can except against him; the man’s mad,
        And privileg’d by the moon, if he say true:
        Less madness ’tis to speak sin than to do.
        This wretch, that lov’d before his food his strife,
        This punishment falls even with his life.
        His pleasure was vexation, all his bliss
        The torment of another;
        Their hurt[900] his health, their starved hopes his
           store:
        Who so loves law dies either mad or poor.

                            _Enter_ FIDELIO.

          FID. A miracle, a miracle!
          PHŒ. How now, Fidelio?
          FID. My lord, a miracle!
          PHŒ. What is’t?
          FID. I have found
        One quiet, suffering, and unlawyer’d man;
        An opposite, a very contrary
        To the old turbulent fellow.
          PHŒ. Why, he’s mad.
          FID. Mad? why, he is in his right wits: could he be
        madder than he was? if he be any way altered from what
        he was, ’tis for the better, my lord.
          PHŒ. Well, but where’s this wonder?
          FID. ’Tis coming,[901] my lord: a man so truly a man, so
        indifferently a creature, using the world in his right
        nature but to tread upon; one that would not bruise the
        cowardliest enemy to man, the worm, that dares not shew
        his malice till we are dead: nay, my lord, you will
        admire his temper: see where he comes.

                            _Enter_ QUIETO.

        I promis’d your acquaintance, sir: yon is
        The gentleman I did commend for temper.
          QUI. Let me embrace you simply,
        That’s perfectly, and more in heart than hand:
        Let affectation keep at court.
          PHŒ. Ay, let it.
          QUI. ’Tis told me you love quiet.
          PHŒ. Above wealth.
          QUI. I above life: I have been wild and rash,
        Committed many and unnatural crimes,
        Which I have since repented.
          PHŒ. ’Twas well spent.
          QUI. I was mad, stark mad, nine years together.
          PHŒ. I pray, as how?
          QUI. Going to law, i’faith, it made me mad.
          PHŒ. With the like frenzy, not an hour since,
        An aged man was struck.
          QUI. Alas, I pity him!
          PHŒ. He’s not worth pitying, for ’twas still his
             gladness
        To be at variance.
          QUI. Yet a man’s worth pity:
        My quiet blood has blest me with this gift:
        I have cur’d some; and if his wits be not
        Too deeply cut, I will assay to help ’em.
          PHŒ. Sufferance does teach you pity.

                              _Enter_ BOY.

          BOY. O master, master! your abominable next neighbour
        came into the house, being half in drink, and took away
        your best carpet.[902]
          QUI. Has he it?
          BOY. Alas, sir!
          QUI. Let him go; trouble him not: lock the door quietly
        after him, and have a safer care who comes in next.
          PHŒ. But, sir, might I advise you, in such a cause as
        this a man might boldly, nay, with conscience, go to
        law.
          QUI. O, I’ll give him the table too first! Better endure
        a fist than a sharp sword: I had rather they should pull
        off my clothes than flay off my skin, and hang that on
        mine enemy’s hedge.
          PHŒ. Why,
        For such good causes was the law ordain’d.
          QUI. True,
        And in itself ’tis glorious and divine;
        Law is the very masterpiece of heaven:
        But see yonder,
        There’s many clouds between the sun and us;
        There’s too much cloth before we see the law.
          PHŒ. I’m content with that answer; be mild still:
        ’Tis honour to forgive those you could kill.
          QUI. There do I keep.
          PHŒ. Reach me your hand: I love you,
        And you shall know me better.
          QUI. ’Tis my suit.
          PHŒ. The night grows deep, and——

                         _Enter two Officers._

          FIRST OFF. Come away, this way, this way.
          PHŒ. Who be those? stand close a little.

            [_As they retire_, PHŒNIX _happens to jar the ring
              of the Jeweller’s door; the Maid enters from the
              house and catches hold of him_.

          MAID. O, you’re come as well as e’er you came in your
        life! my master’s new gone to bed. Give me your knightly
        hand: I must lead you into the blind parlour; my
        mistress will be down to you presently.
                                             [_Takes in_ PHŒNIX.
          FIRST OFF. I tell you our safest course will be to
        arrest him when he comes out a’ th’ tavern, for then he
        will be half drunk, and will not stand upon his weapon.
          SECOND OFF. Our safest course indeed, for he will draw.
          FIRST OFF. That he will, though he put it up again,
        which is more of his courtesy than of our deserving.
                                             [_Exeunt Officers._
          QUI. The world is nothing but vexation,
        Spite, and uncharitable action.
          FID. Did you see the gentleman?
          QUI. Not I.
          FID. Where should he be? it may be he’s past by:
        Good sir, let’s overtake him.                [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                   _A Room in the Jeweller’s House._

                       _Enter_ PHŒNIX _and Maid_.

          MAID. Here, sir: now you are there, sir, she’ll come
        down to you instantly. I must not stay with you; my
        mistress would be jealous: you must do nothing to me; my
        mistress would find it quickly.        [_Exit._
          PHŒ. ’S foot, whither am I led? brought in by th’ hand?
        I hope it can be no harm to stay for a woman, though
        indeed they were never more dangerous: I have ventured
        hitherto and safe, and I must venture to stay now. This
        should be a fair room, but I see it not: the blind
        parlour calls she it?

                        _Enter_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.

          JEW. WIFE. Where art thou, O my knight?
          PHŒ. Your knight? I am the duke’s knight.
          JEW. WIFE. I say you’re my knight, for I’m sure I paid
        for you.
          PHŒ. Paid for you?—hum.—’S foot, a light!
               [_Snatches in a light, and then extinguishes it._
          JEW. WIFE. Now out upon the marmoset![903] Hast thou
        served me so long, and offer to bring in a candle?
          PHŒ. Fair room, villanous face, and worse woman! I ha’
        learnt something by a glimpse a’ th’ candle.
                                                       [_Aside._
          JEW. WIFE. How happened it you came so soon? I looked
        not for you these two hours; yet, as the sweet chance
        is, you came as well as a thing could come, for my
        husband’s newly brought a-bed.
          PHŒ. And what has Jove sent him?
          JEW. WIFE. He ne’er sent him any thing since I knew him:
        he’s a man of a bad nature to his wife; none but his
        maids can thrive under him.
          PHŒ. Out upon him!
          JEW. WIFE. Ay, judge whether I have a cause to be a
        courtesan or no? to do as I do? An elderly fellow as he
        is, if he were married to a young virgin, he were able
        to break her heart, though he could break nothing else.
        Here, here; there’s just a hundred and fifty [_giving
        money_]; but I stole ’em so hardly from him, ’twould
        e’en have grieved you to have seen it.
          PHŒ. So ’twould, i’faith.
          JEW. WIFE. Therefore, prithee, my sweet Pleasure, do not
        keep company so much. How do you think I am able to
        maintain you? Though I be a jeweller’s wife, jewels are
        like women, they rise and fall; we must be content to
        lose sometimes, to gain often; but you’re content always
        to lose, and never to gain. What need you ride with a
        footman before you?
          PHŒ. O, that’s the grace!
          JEW. WIFE. The grace? ’tis sufficient grace that you’ve
        a horse to ride upon. You should think thus with
        yourself every time you go to bed,—if my head were laid,
        what would become of that horse? he would run a bad race
        then, as well as his master.
          PHŒ. Nay, and[904] you give me money to chide me——
          JEW. WIFE. No, if it were as much more, I would think it
        foul scorn to chide you. I advise you to be thrifty, to
        take the time now, while you have it: you shall seldom
        get such another fool as I am, I warrant you. Why,
        there’s Metreza[905] Auriola keeps her love with half
        the cost that I am at: her friend can go a’ foot like a
        good husband, walk in worsted stockings, and inquire for
        the sixpenny ordinary.[906]
          PHŒ. Pox on’t, and would you have me so base?
          JEW. WIFE. No, I would not have you so base neither: but
        now and then, when you keep your chamber, you might let
        your footman out for eighteenpence a-day; a great relief
        at year’s end, I can tell you.
          PHŒ. The age must needs be foul when vice reforms it.
                                                       [_Aside._
          JEW. WIFE. Nay, I’ve a greater quarrel to you yet.
          PHŒ. I’faith, what is’t?
          JEW. WIFE. You made me believe at first the prince had
        you in great estimation, and would not offer to travel
        without you, nay, that he could not travel without your
        direction and intelligence.
          PHŒ. I’m sorry I said so, i’faith; but sure I was
        overflown[907] when I spoke it, I could ne’er ha’ said
        it else.
          JEW. WIFE. Nay more; you swore to me that you were the
        first that taught him to ride a great horse, and
        tread[908] the ring with agility.
          PHŒ. By my troth, I must needs confess I swore a great
        lie in that, and I was a villain to do it, for I could
        ne’er ride great horse in my life.
          JEW. WIFE. Why, lo, who would love you now but a
        citizen’s wife? so inconstant, so forsworn! You
        say women are false creatures; but, take away men,
        and they’d be honester than you. Nay, last of all,
        which offends me most of all, you told me you could
        countenance me at court; and you know we esteem a friend
        there more worth than a husband here.
          PHŒ. What I spake of that, lady, I’ll maintain.
          JEW. WIFE. You maintain? you seen at court?
          PHŒ. Why, by this diamond——
          JEW. WIFE. O, take heed! you cannot have that; ’tis
        always in the eye of my husband.
          PHŒ. I protest I will not keep it, but only use it for
        this virtue, as a token to fetch you, and approve[909]
        my power, where you shall not only be received, but made
        known to the best and chiefest.
          JEW. WIFE. O, are you true?
          PHŒ. Let me lose my revenue[910] else.
          JEW. WIFE. That’s your word, indeed! and upon that
        condition take it, this kiss, and my love for ever.
                                          [_Giving the diamond._
          PHŒ. Enough.
          JEW. WIFE. Give me thy hand, I’ll lead thee forth.
          PHŒ. I’m sick of all professions; my thoughts burn:
        He travels best that knows when to return.    [_Aside._
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                _A Street: before the Jeweller’s House._

            _Enter_ KNIGHT, _two Officers watching for him_.

          KNIGHT. Adieu, farewell;[911] to bed you; I to my sweet
        city-bird, my precious Revenue: the very thought of a
        hundred and fifty angels[912] increases oil and spirit,
        ho!
          FIRST OFF. I arrest you. sir.
          KNIGHT. O!
          FIRST OFF. You have made us wait a goodly time for you,
        have you not, think you? You are in your rouses[913] and
        mullwines,[914] a pox on you! and have no care of poor
        officers staying for you.

          KNIGHT. I drunk but one health, I protest; but I could
        void it now. At whose suit, I pray?
          FIRST OFF. At the suit of him that makes suits, your
        tailor.
          KNIGHT. Why, he made me the last; this, this that I
        wear.
          FIRST OFF. Argo,[915]—nay, we have been scholars, I can
        tell you,—we could not have been knaves so soon else;
        for as in that notable city called London stand two most
        famous universities, Poultry and Wood-street,[916] where
        some are of twenty years’ standing, and have took all
        their degrees, from the Master’s side down to the
        Mistress’ side, the Hole,[917] so in like manner——
          KNIGHT. Come, come, come, I had quite forgot the hundred
        and fifty angels.
          SECOND OFF. ’Slid, where be they?
          KNIGHT. I’ll bring you to the sight of’em presently.
          FIRST OFF. A notable lad, and worthy to be arrested!
        We’ll have but ten for waiting; and then thou shalt
        choose whether thou wilt run away from us, or we from
        thee.
          KNIGHT. A match at running! come, come, follow me.
          SECOND OFF. Nay, fear not that.
          KNIGHT. Peace; you may happen to see toys,[918] but do
        not see ’em.
          FIRST OFF. Pah!
          KNIGHT. That’s the door.
          FIRST OFF. This?                           [_Knocks._
          KNIGHT. ’S foot, officer, you have spoiled all already.
          FIRST OFF. Why?
          KNIGHT. Why? you shall see: you should have but whirled
        the ring once about, and there’s a maidservant brought
        up to understand it.
          MAID. [_opening the door_] Who’s at door?
          KNIGHT. All’s well again.—Phist, ’tis I, ’tis I.
          MAID. You? what are you?
          KNIGHT. Pooh! where’s thy mistress?
          MAID. What of her?
          KNIGHT. Tell her one—she knows who—her Pleasure’s here,
        say.
          MAID. Her pleasure? my mistress scorns to be without her
        pleasure at this time of night. Is she so void of
        friends, think you? take that for thinking so.
               _Gives him a box on the ear, and shuts the door._
          FIRST OFF. The hundred and fifty angels are locked up in
        a box; we shall not see ’em tonight.
          KNIGHT. How’s this? am I used like a hundred-pound
        gentleman? does my Revenue forsake me? Damn me, if ever
        I be her Pleasure again!—Well, I must to prison.
          FIRST OFF. Go prepare his room; there’s no remedy: I’ll
        bring him along; he’s tame enough now.           [_Exit Second
        Officer._

          KNIGHT. Dare my tailor presume to use me in this sort?
        He steals, and I must lie in prison for’t.
          FIRST OFF. Come, come, away, sir!

                   _Enter a Gentleman and a Drawer._

          GENT. Art sure thou sawest him arrested, drawer?
          DRA. If mine eyes be sober.
          GENT. And that’s a question. Mass, here he goes! he
        shall not go to prison; I have a trick shall bail him:
        away!                                   [_Exit Drawer._
         [_Blinds the First Officer, while the_ KNIGHT _escapes_.
          FIRST OFF. O!
          GENT. Guess, guess! who am I? who am I?
          FIRST OFF. Who the devil are you? let go: a pox on you!
        who are you? I have lost my prisoner.
          GENT. Prisoner? I’ve mistook; I cry you heartily mercy;
        I have done you infinite injury; a’ my troth, I took you
        to be an honest man.
          FIRST OFF. Where were your eyes? could you not see I was
        an officer?—Stop, stop, stop, stop!
          GENT. Ha, ha, ha, ha!            [_Exeunt severally._




                            ACT V. SCENE I.


        _The Presence-Chamber in the Duke of Ferrara’s Palace._

                     _Enter_ PRODITOR _and_ PHŒNIX.

          PROD. Now, Phœnix.[919]
          PHŒ. Now, my lord.
          PROD. Let princely blood Nourish our hopes; we bring
        confusion now.
          PHŒ. A terrible sudden blow.
          PROD. Ay: what day Is this hangs over us?
          PHŒ. By th’ mass, Monday.
          PROD. As I could wish; my purpose will thrive best:
        ’Twas first my birth-day, now my fortune’s day. I see
        whom fate will raise needs never pray.
          PHŒ. Never.
          PROD. How is the air?
          PHŒ. O, full of trouble!
          PROD. Does not the sky look piteously black?
          PHŒ. As if ’twere hung with rich men’s consciences.
          PROD. Ah, stuck not a comet, like a carbuncle, Upon the
        dreadful brow of twelve last night?
          PHŒ. Twelve? no, ’twas about one.
          PROD. About one? most proper, For that’s the duke.
          PHŒ. Well shifted from thyself!             [_Aside._
          PROD. I could have wish’d it between one and two,
        His son and him.
          PHŒ. I’ll give you comfort then.
          PROD. Prithee.
          PHŒ. There was a villanous raven seen last night
        Over the presence-chamber, in hard justle
        With a young eaglet.
          PROD. A raven? that was I: what did the raven?
          PHŒ. Marry, my lord, the raven—to say truth,
        I left the combat doubtful.
          PROD. So ’tis still,
        For all is doubt till the deed crown the will.
        Now bless thy loins with freedom, wealth, and honour;
        Think all thy seed young lords, and by this act
        Make a foot-cloth’d[920] posterity; now imagine
        Thou see’st thy daughters with their trains borne up,
        Whom else despisèd want may curse to whoredom,
        And public shames which our state never threat:
        She’s never lewd that is accounted great.
          PHŒ. I’ll alter that court axiom, thus renew’d,
        She’s never great that is accounted lewd.     [_Aside._

                        _Enter several Nobles._

          PROD. Stand close; the presence fills. Here, here the
             place;
        And at his rising, let his fall be base,
        Beneath thy foot.
          PHŒ. How for his guard, my lord?
          PROD. My gold and fear keep[921] with the chief of
             them.
          PHŒ. That’s rarely well.
          PROD. Bold, heedless slave, that dares attempt a deed
        Which shall in pieces rend him!               [_Aside._

                   _Enter_ LUSSURIOSO _and_ INFESTO.

        My lords both!
          LUS. The happiness of the day!
          PHŒ. Time my returning;
        Treasons have still the worst, yet still are spurning.
                                                       [_Aside._

                      _Enter the_ DUKE _attended_.

          PROD. The duke!
          PHŒ. I ne’er was gladder to behold him.
          ALL. Long live your grace!
          DUKE. I do not like that strain:
        You know my age affords not to live long.
          PROD. Spoke truer than you think for.       [_Aside._
          DUKE. Bestow that wish upon the prince our son.
          PHŒ. Nay, he’s not to live long neither.    [_Aside._
          PROD. Him as the wealthy treasure of our hopes,
        You as possession of our present comfort,
        Both in one heart we reverence in one.
          PHŒ. O treason of a good complexion!        [_Aside._
                                          [_Horn winded within._
          DUKE. How now? what fresher news fills the court’s ear?

                            _Enter_ FIDELIO.

          PROD. Fidelio!
          FID. Glad tidings to your grace!
        The prince is safe return’d, and in your court.
          DUKE. Our joy breaks at our eyes; the prince is come!
          PROD. Soul-quicking[922] news!—pale vengeance to my
             blood!                                 [_Aside._
          FID. By me presenting to your serious view
        A brief of all his travels.        [_Delivers a paper._
          DUKE. ’Tis most welcome;
        It shall be dear and precious to our eye.
          PROD. He reads; I’m glad he reads.—
        Now take thy opportunity, leave that place.
          PHŒ. At his first rising let his fall be base.[923]
          PROD. That must be alter’d now.
          PHŒ. Which? his rising or his fall?
          PROD. Art thou dull now?
        Thou hear’st the prince is come.
          DUKE. What’s here?[924]
          PROD. My lord?
          DUKE [_reads_]. _I have got such a large portion of
        knowledge, most worthy father, by the benefit of my
        travel_——
          PROD. And so he has, no doubt, my lord.
          DUKE [_reads_]. _That I am bold now to warn you of Lord
        Proditor’s insolent treason, who has irreligiously
        seduced a fellow, and closely conveyed him e’en in the
        presence-chair to murder you._
          PHŒ. O guilty, guilty!
          DUKE. What was that fell? what’s he?
          PHŒ. I am the man.
          PROD. O slave!
          PHŒ. I have no power to strike.
          PROD. I’m gone, I’m gone!
          DUKE. Let me admire heaven’s wisdom in my son.
          PHŒ. I confess it, he hir’d me——
          PROD. This is a slave:
        ’Tis forg’d against mine honour and my life;
        For in what part of reason can’t appear,
        The prince being travell’d should know treasons here?
        Plain counterfeit.
          DUKE. Dost thou make false our son?
          PROD. I know the prince will not affirm’t.[925]
          FID. He can
        And will, my lord.
          PHŒ. Most just, he may.
          DUKE. A guard!
          LUS. We cannot but in loyal zeal ourselves
        Lay hands on such a villain.
          DUKE. Stay you; I find you here too.
                                  [_Attendants secure_ PRODITOR.
          LUS. Us, my lord?
          DUKE [_reads_]. _Against Lussurioso and Infesto, who
        not only most riotously consume their houses in vicious
        gaming, mortgaging their livings to the merchant,
        whereby he with his heirs enter upon their lands; from
        whence this abuse comes, that in short time the son of
        the merchant has more lordships than the son of the
        nobleman, which else was never born to inheritance: but
        that which is more impious, they most adulterously train
        out young ladies to midnight banquets, to the utter
        defamation of their own honours, and ridiculous abuse of
        their husbands._
          LUS. How could the prince hear that?
          PHŒ. Most true, my lord:
        My conscience is a witness ’gainst itself;
        For to that execution of chaste honour
        I was both hir’d and led.
          LUS. I hope the prince, out of his plenteous wisdom,
        Will not give wrong to us: as for this fellow,
        He’s poor, and cares not to be desperate.

                             _Enter_ FALSO.

          FAL. Justice, my lord! I have my niece stol’n from me:
        Sh’as left her dowry with me, but she’s gone:
        I’d rather have had her love than her money, I.
        This, this is one of them. Justice, my lord!
        I know him by his face; this is the thief.
          PROD. Your grace may now in milder sense perceive
        The wrong done to us by this impudent wretch,
        Who has his hand fix’d at the throat of law,
        And therefore durst be desperate of his life.
          DUKE. Peace, you’re too foul; your crime is in excess:
        One spot of him makes not your ulcers less.
          PROD. O!
          DUKE. Did your violence force away his niece?
          PHŒ. No, my good lord; I’ll still confess what’s
             truth;
        I did remove her from her many wrongs,
        Which she was pleas’d to leave, they were so vild.[926]
          DUKE. What are you nam’d?
          FAL. Falso, my lord, Justice Falso;
        I’m known by that name.
          DUKE. Falso? you came fitly;
        You are the very next that follows here.
          FAL. I hope so, my lord; my name is in all the records,
        I can assure your good grace.

                 _Enter_ NIECE _and_ CASTIZA _behind_.

          DUKE [_reads_]. _Against Justice Falso_——
          FAL. Ah!
          DUKE [_reads_]. _Who, having had the honest charge of
        his niece committed to his trust by the last will and
        testament of her deceased father, and with her all the
        power of his wealth, not only against faith and
        conscience detains her dowry, but against nature and
        humanity assays to abuse her body._

          NIECE [_coming forward_]. I’m present to affirm it, my
             lov’d lord.
          FAL. How? what make I here?[927]
          NIECE. Either I must agree
        To loathed lust, or despis’d beggary.
          DUKE. Are you the plaintiff here?
          FAL. Ay, my good lord,
        For fault of a better.
          DUKE. Seldom comes a worse.—[_Reads_] _And moreover, not
        contained in[928] this vice only, which is odious too
        much, but, against the sacred use of justice, maintains
        three thieves to his men._
          FAL. Cuds me!
          DUKE [_reads_]. _Who only take purses in their master’s
        liberty, where if any one chance to be taken, he appears
        before him in a false beard, and one of his own fellows
        takes his examination._
          FAL. By my troth, as true as can be; but he shall not
        know on’t.                                    [_Aside._
          DUKE [_reads_]. _And in the end will execute justice so
        cruelly upon him, that he will not trust him in a
        prison, but commit him to his fellows’ chamber._
          FAL. Can a man do nothing i’ the country but ’tis told
        at court? there’s some busy informing knave abroad, a’
        my life.                                      [_Aside._
          PHŒ. That this is true, and these, and more, my lord,
        Be it, under pardon, spoken for mine own;
        He the disease of justice, these of honour,
        And this of loyalty and reverence,
        The unswept venom of the palace.
          PROD. Slave!
          PHŒ. Behold the prince to approve it!
                                      [_Discovers himself._[929]
          PROD. O, where?
          PHŒ. Your eyes keep with your actions, both look
             wrong.
          PROD. An infernal to my spirit!
          ALL. My lord, the prince!
          PROD. Tread me to dust, thou in whom wonder
             keeps![930]
        Behold the serpent on his belly creeps.
          PHŒ. Rankle not my foot; away!
        Treason, we laugh at thy vain-labouring stings,[931]
        Above the foot thou hast no power o’er kings!
          DUKE. I cannot with sufficient joy receive thee,
        And yet my joy’s too much.
          PHŒ. My royal father,
        To whose unnatural murder I was hir’d,
        I thought it a more natural course of travel,
        And answering future expectation,
        To leave far countries, and inquire mine own.
          DUKE. To thee let reverence all her powers engage,
        That art in youth a miracle to age!
        State is but blindness; thou hadst piercing art:
        We only saw the knee, but thou the heart.
        To thee, then, power and dukedom we resign:
        He’s fit to reign whose knowledge can refine.
          PHŒ. Forbid it my obedience!
          DUKE. Our word’s not vain:
        I know thee wise, canst both obey and reign.
        The rest of life we dedicate to heaven.
          ALL. A happy and safe reign to our new duke!
          PHŒ. Without your prayers safer and happier.—
        Fidelio.
          FID. My royal lord.
          PHŒ. Here, take this diamond:[932]
        You know the virtue on’t; it can fetch vice.
        Madam Castiza——
          FID. She attends, my lord.                   [_Exit._
          PHŒ. Place a guard near us.—
        Know you yon fellow, lady?
          CAS. [_coming forward_] My honour’s evil!
          PROD. Torment again![933]
          PHŒ. So ugly are thy crimes,
        Thine eye cannot endure ’em:
        And that thy face may stand perpetually
        Turn’d so from ours, and thy abhorred self
        Neither to threaten wrack[934] of state or credit,
        An everlasting banishment seize on thee!
          PROD. O fiend!
          PHŒ. Thy life is such it is too bad to end.
          PROD. May thy rule, life, and all that’s in thee glad,
        Have as short time as thy begetting had!
          PHŒ. Away! thy curse is idle.       [_Exit_ PRODITOR.
        The rest are under reformation,
        And therefore under pardon.
          LUS. &c. Our duties shall turn edge upon our crimes.
          FAL. ’Slid, I was afraid of nothing, but that for my
        thievery and bawdery I should have been turned to an
        innkeeper.                      [_Aside._

               _Re-enter_ FIDELIO _with_ JEWELLER’S WIFE.

        My daughter! I am ashamed her worship should see me.
          JEW. WIFE. Who would not love a friend at court? what
        fine galleries and rooms am I brought through! I had
        thought my Knight durst not have shewn his face here, I.
          PHŒ. Now, mother of pride and daughter of lust, which is
        your friend now?
          JEW. WIFE. Ah me!
          PHŒ. I’m sure you are not so unprovided to be without a
        friend here: you’ll pay enough for him first.
          JEW. WIFE. This is the worst room that ever I came in.
          PHŒ. I am your servant, mistress;[935] know you not me?
          JEW. WIFE. Your worship is too great for me to know: I’m
        but a small-timbered woman, when I’m out of my apparel,
        and dare not venture upon greatness.
          PHŒ. Do you deny me then? know you this purse?
          JEW. WIFE. That purse? O death, has the Knight serv’d
             me so?
        Given away my favours?
          PHŒ. Stand forth, thou one of those
        For whose close lusts the plague ne’er[936] leaves the
           city.
        Thou worse than common! private, subtle harlot!
        That dost deceive three with one feigned lip,
        Thy husband, the world’s eye, and the law’s whip.
        Thy zeal is hot, for ’tis to lust and fraud,
        And dost not dread to make thy book thy bawd.
        Thou’rt curse enough to husband’s ill-got gains,
        For whom the court rejects his gold maintains.
        How dear and rare was freedom wont to be!
        Now few but are by their wives’ copies free,
        And brought to such a head, that now we see
        City and suburbs wear one livery!
          JEW. WIFE. ’Tis ’long of those,[937] an’t like your
        grace, that come in upon us, and will never leave
        marrying of our widows till they make ’em all as free as
        their first husbands.
          PHŒ. I perceive you can shift a point well.
          JEW. WIFE. Let me have pardon, I beseech your grace, and
        I’ll peach ’em all, all the close women that are; and,
        upon my knowledge, there’s above five thousand within
        the walls and the liberties.
          PHŒ. A band! they shall be sent against the
             Turks;[938]
        Infidels against infidels.
          JEW. WIFE. I will hereafter live so modestly, I will not
        lie with mine own husband, nor come near a man in the
        way of honesty.
          FAL. I’ll be her warrant, my lord.
          PHŒ. You are deceiv’d; you think you’re still a
             justice.
          FAL. ’S foot, worse than I was before I kneeled!
        I am no justice now; I know I shall be some innkeeper
        at last.
          JEW. WIFE. My father? ’tis mine own father.
          PHŒ. I should have wonder’d else, lust being so like.
          NIECE. Her birth was kin to mine; she may prove
             modest:
        For my sake I beseech you pardon her.
          PHŒ. For thy sake I’ll do more.—Fidelio, hand her.
        My favours on you both; next, all that wealth
        Which was committed to that perjur’d’s trust.
          FAL. I’m a beggar now; worse than an innkeeper.

                         _Enter_ TANGLE _mad_.

          TAN. Your _mittimus_ shall not serve: I’ll set myself
        free with a _deliberandum_; with a _deliberandum_, mark
        you.
          DUKE. What’s he? a guard!
          PHŒ. Under your sufferance,
        Worthy father, his harm is to himself;
        One that has lov’d vexation so much,
        He cannot now be rid on’t:
        Has been so long in suits, that he’s law-mad.
          TAN. A judgment, I crave a judgment, yea! _nunc pro
        tunc, corruptione alicujus_. I peeped me a raven in the
        face, and I thought it had been my solicitor: O, the
        pens prick me!

                            _Enter_ QUIETO.

          PHŒ. And here comes he (wonder for temperance)
        Will take the cure upon him.
          QUI. A blessing to this fair assembly!
          TAN. Away! I’ll have none on’t: give me an _audita
        querela_, or a _testificandum_, or a despatch in twelve
        terms: there’s a blessing, there’s a blessing!
          PHŒ. You see the unbounded rage of his disease.
          QUI. ’Tis the foul fiend, my lord, has got within him.
        The rest are fair to this: this breeds in ink,
        And to that colour turns the blood possess’d:
        For instance, now your grace shall see him dress’d.
          TAN. Ah ha! I rejoice then he’s puzzled, and muzzled
             too:
        Is’t come to a _cepi corpus_?
          QUI. Ah, good sir,
        This is for want of patience!
          TAN. That’s a fool:
        She never saw the dogs and the bears fight;[939]
        A country thing.
          QUI. This is for lack of grace.
          TAN. I’ve other business, not so much idle time.
          QUI. You never say your prayers.
          TAN. I’m advised by my learned counsel.
          QUI. The power of my charm come o’er thee,
        Place by degrees thy wits before thee!
        With silken patience here I bind thee,
        Not to move till I unwind thee.
          TAN. Yea! is my cause so muddy? do I stick, do I stick
             fast?
        Advocate, here’s my hand, pull; art made of flint?
        Wilt not help out? alas, there’s nothing in’t!
          PHŒ. O, do you sluice the vein now?
          QUI. Yes, my honour’d lord.
          PHŒ. Pray, let me see the issue.
          QUI. I therefore seek to keep it.—Now burst out,
        Thou filthy stream of trouble, spite, and doubt!
          TAN. O, an extent, a proclamation, a summons, a
        recognisance, a tachment, and injunction! a writ, a
        seizure, a writ of ’praisement, an absolution, a
        _quietus est_!
          QUI. You’re quieter, I hope, by so much dregs.—Behold,
        my lord!
          PHŒ. This! why, it outfrowns ink.
          QUI. ’Tis the disease’s nature, the fiend’s drink.
          TAN. O sick, sick, signior Ply-fee, sick! lend me thy
        nightcap, O!
          QUI. The balsam of a temperate brain
        I pour into this thirsty vein,
        And with this blessed oil of quiet,
        Which is so cheap, that few men buy it,
        Thy stormy temples I allay:
        Thou shalt give up the devil, and pray;
        Forsake his works, they’re foul and black,
        And keep thee bare in purse and back.
        No more shalt thou in paper quarrel,
        To dress up apes in good apparel.
        He throws his stock and all his flock
          Into a swallowing gulf,
        That sends his goose unto his fox,
          His lamb unto his wolf.
        Keep thy increase,
        And live at peace,
        For war’s[940] not equal to this battle:
        That eats but men; this men and cattle:
        Therefore no more this combat choose,
        Where he that wins does always lose;
        And those that gain all, with this curse receive it,
        From fools they get it, to their sons they leave it.
                  TAN. Hail, sacred patience! I begin to feel
        I have a conscience now; truth in my words,
        Compassion in my heart, and, above all,
        In my blood peace’s music. Use me how you can,
        You shall find me an honest, quiet man.
        O, pardon, that I dare behold that face!
        Now I’ve least[941] law I hope I have most grace.
                  PHŒ. We both admire the workman and his piece.
        Thus when all hearts are tun’d to honour’s strings,
        There is no music to the quire of kings.
                                                [_Exeunt omnes._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                            MICHAELMAS TERM.




              _Michaelmas Terme. As it hath been sundry times
              acted by the Children of Paules. At London,
              Printed for A. I. and are to be sould at the signe
              of the white horse in Paules Churchyard. An.
              1607._ 4to. Another ed., _newly corrected_,
              appeared 1630. 4to.

              This play was licensed by Sir George Bucke, 15th
              May, 1607: see Chalmers’s _Suppl. Apol._ p. 200.




                              DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

                EASY, }
                REARAGE, } _gentlemen_.
                SALEWOOD, }
                COCKSTONE, }
                QUOMODO, _a woollen-draper_.
                SHORTYARD, } _his attendants_.
                FALSELIGHT, }
                SIM, _son to_ QUOMODO.
                ANDREW LETHE, _an adventurer, son to_ MOTHER
                  GRUEL.
                HELLGILL, _a pander_.
                _Father to the Country Wench._
                _Judge._
                DUSTBOX, _a scrivener_.
                _Tailor._
                _Drawer._
                _Boy._
                _Beadle._
                _Liverymen, Officers, &c._

                THOMASINE, _wife to_ QUOMODO, _afterwards
                  married to_ EASY.
                SUSAN, _her daughter_.
                THOMASINE’s _mother_.
                MOTHER GRUEL.
                _Country Wench, seduced by_ LETHE.
                MISTRESS COMINGS, _a tire-woman_.
                WINEFRED, _maid to_ THOMASINE.

                               INDUCTION.

          _Michaelmas Term._
          _The other Three Terms._
          _Boy, &c._

                             SCENE, LONDON.




                            MICHAELMAS TERM.


                             --------------


                               INDUCTION.

        _Enter Michaelmas Term in a whitish cloak, new come up
        out of the country, a Boy bringing his gown after him._

          MICH. T. Boy.
          BOY. Here, sir.
          MICH. T. Lay by my conscience;
        Give me my gown; that weed is for the country:
        We must be civil now, and match our evil:
        Who first made civil black, he pleas’d the devil.
        So:
        Now know I where I am: methinks already
        I grasp best part of the autumnian blessing
        In my contentious fathom;[942] my hand’s free:
        From wronger and from wronged I have fee;
        And what by sweat from the rough earth they draw
        Is to enrich this silver harvest, law;
        And so through wealthy variance and fat brawl,
        The barn is made but steward to the hall.
        Come they up thick enough?
          BOY. O, like hops and harlots, sir. MICH. T. Why dost
        thou couple them? BOY. O very aptly; for as the hop well
        boiled will make a man not stand upon his legs, so the
        harlot in time will leave a man no legs to stand upon.
          MICH. T. Such another, and be my heir! I have no
             child,
        Yet have I wealth would redeem beggary.
        I think it be a curse both here and foreign,
        Where bags are fruitful’st there the womb’s most barren:
        The poor has all our children, we their wealth.
        Shall I be prodigal when my life cools,
        Make those my heirs whom I have beggar’d, fools?
        It would be wondrous; rather beggar more;
        Thou shalt have heirs enow, thou keep’st a whore:
        And here comes kindred too with no mean purses,
        Yet strive to be still blest with clients’ curses.

            _Music playing, enter the other three Terms, the
              first bringing in a fellow poor, which the other
              two advance,[943] giving him rich apparel, a page,
              and a pander: he then goes out._

          MICH. T. What subtilty have we here? a fellow
        Shrugging for life’s kind benefits, shift and heat,
        Crept up in three terms, wrapt in silk and silver,
        So well appointed too with page and pander!
        It was a happy gale that blew him hither.
          FIRST T. Thou father of the Terms, hail to thee!
          SEC. T. May much contention still keep with thee!
          THIRD T. Many new fools come up and fee thee!
          SEC. T. Let ’em pay dear enough that see thee!
          FIRST T. And like asses use such men;
        When their load’s off, turn ’em to graze agen.[944]
          SEC. T. And may our wish have full effect,
        Many a suit, and much neglect!
          THIRD T. And as it hath been often found,
        Let the clients’ cups come round!
          SEC. T. Help your poor kinsmen, when you ha’ got ’em;
        You may drink deep, leave us the bottom.
          THIRD T. Or when there is a lamb fall’n in,
        Take you the lamb, leave us the skin.
          MICH. T. Your duty and regard hath mov’d us;
        Never till now we thought you lov’d us.
        Take comfort from our words, and make no doubt
        You shall have suits come sixteen times about.
          ALL THREE. We humbly thank the patron of our hopes.
                                                      [_Exeunt._
          MICH. T. With what a vassal-appetite they gnaw
        On our reversions, and are proud
        Coldly to taste our meats, which eight returns
        Serve in to us as courses!
        One day our writs, like wild-fowl, fly abroad,
        And then return o’er cities, towns, and hills,
        With clients, like dried straws, between their bills;
        And ’tis no few birds pick to build their neasts,[945]
        Nor no small money that keeps drabs and feasts!
         But, gentlemen, to spread myself open unto you, in
        cheaper terms I salute you; for ours have but sixpenny
        fees all the year long; yet we despatch you in two
        hours, without demur; your suits hang not long here
        after candles be lighted. Why we call this play by such
        a dear and chargeable title, _Michaelmas Term_, know it
        consents happily to our purpose, though perhaps faintly
        to the interpretation of many; for he that expects any
        great quarrels in law to be handled here will be fondly
        deceived; this only presents those familiar accidents
        which happened in town in the circumference of those six
        weeks whereof Michaelmas Term is lord. _Sat sapienti_: I
        hope there’s no fools i’ th’ house.   [_Exit with Boy._




                            ACT I. SCENE I.


                 _The Middle[946] Aisle of St. Paul’s._

                  _Enter_ REARAGE _meeting_ SALEWOOD.

          SALE. What, master Rearage?
          REAR. Master Salewood? exceedingly well met in town.
        Comes your father up this term?
          SALE. Why, he was here three days before the Exchequer
        gaped.
          REAR. Fie, such an early termer?
          SALE. He’s not to be spoke withal; I dare not ask him
        blessing till the last of November.
          REAR. And how looks thy little venturing cousin?
          SALE. Faith, like a lute that has all the strings broke;
        nobody will meddle with her.
          REAR. Fie, there are doctors enow in town will string
        her again, and make her sound as sweet as e’er she did.
        Is she not married yet?
          SALE. Sh’as no luck; some may better steal a horse than
        others look on: I have known a virgin of five bastards
        wedded. Faith, when all’s done, we must be fain to marry
        her into the north, I’m afraid.
          REAR. But will she pass so, think you?
          SALE. Pooh, any thing that is warm enough is good enough
        for them: so it come in the likeness, though the devil
        be in’t, they’ll venture the firing.
          REAR. They’re worthy spirits, i’faith. Heard you the
        news?
          SALE. Not yet.
          REAR. Mistress Difficult is newly fallen a widow.
          SALE. Say true; is master Difficult, the lawyer, dead?
          REAR. Easily dead, sir.
          SALE. Pray, when died he?
          REAR. What a question’s that! when should a lawyer die
        but in the vacation? he has no leisure to die in the
        term-time; beside, the noise there would fetch him
        again.
          SALE. Knew you the nature of his disease?
          REAR. Faith, some say he died of an old grief he had,
        that the vacation was fourteen weeks long.
          SALE. And very likely: I knew ’twould kill him at last;
        ’t’as troubled him a long time. He was one of those that
        would fain have brought in the heresy of a fifth term;
        often crying, with a loud voice, O why should we lose
        Bartholomew week?
          REAR. He savours; stop your nose; no more of him.

                   _Enter_ COCKSTONE _meeting_ EASY.

          COCK. Young master Easy, let me salute you, sir.
        When came you?
          EASY. I have but inn’d my horse since, master
             Cockstone.
          COCK. You seldom visit London, master Easy;
        But now your father’s dead, ’tis your only course:
        Here’s gallants of all sizes, of all lasts;
        Here you may fit your foot, make choice of those
        Whom your affection may rejoice in.
          EASY. You’ve[947] easily possess’d[948] me, I am free:
        Let those live hinds that know not liberty!
          COCK. Master Rearage?
          EASY. Good master Salewood, I am proud of your society.
          REAR. What gentleman might that be?
          COCK. One master Easy; has good land in Essex;
        A fair, free-breasted gentleman, somewhat
        Too open—bad in man, worse in woman,
        The gentry-fault at first:—he is yet fresh,
        And wants the city powdering. But what news?
        Is’t yet a match ’twixt master Quomodo’s
        The rich draper’s daughter and yourself?
          REAR. Faith, sir, I am vildly[949] rivall’d.
          COCK. Vildly? by whom?
          REAR. One Andrew Lethe, crept to a little warmth,
        And now so proud that he forgets all storms;
        One that ne’er wore apparel, but, like ditches,
        ’Twas cast before he had it; now shines bright
        In rich embroideries. Him master Quomodo affects,
        The daughter him, the mother only me:
        I rest most doubtful, my side being weakest.
          COCK. Yet the mother’s side
        Being surer than the father’s, it may prove,
        Men plead for money best, women for love.
          REAR. ’Slid, master Quomodo!
          COCK. How then? afraid of a woollen-draper!
          REAR. He warned me his house, and I hate he should see
        me abroad.
                                             [_They all retire._

           _Enter_ QUOMODO, SHORTYARD,[950] _and_ FALSELIGHT.

          QUO. O my two spirits, Shortyard and Falselight, you
        that have so enricht me! I have industry for you both.
          SHO. Then do you please us best, sir.
          QUO. Wealthy employment.
          SHO. You make me itch, sir.
          QUO. You, Falselight, as I have directed you—
          FAL. I am nimble.
          QUO. Go, make my coarse commodities look sleek;[951]
        With subtle art beguile the honest eye:
        Be near to my trap-window, cunning Falselight.
          FAL. I never fail’d it yet.
          QUO. I know thou didst not.—      [_Exit_ FALSELIGHT.
        But now to thee, my true and secret Shortyard,
        Whom I dare trust e’en with my wife;
        Thou ne’er didst mistress harm, but master good:
        There are too few of thy name gentlemen,
        And that we feel, but citizens abundance:
        I have a task for thee, my pregnant spirit,
        To exercise thy pointed wits upon.
          SHO. Give it me, for I thirst.
          QUO. Thine ear shall drink it.
        Know, then, I have not spent this long vacation
        Only for pleasure’s sake:—give me the man
        Who out of recreation culls advantage,
        Dives into seasons, never walks but thinks,
        Ne[952] rides but plots:—my journey was toward Essex——
          SHO. Most true.
          QUO. Where I have seen what I desire.
          SHO. A woman?
          QUO. Pooh, a woman! yet beneath her,
        That which she often treads on, yet commands her;
        Land, fair neat land.
          SHO. What is the mark you shoot at?
          QUO. Why, the fairest to cleave the heir in twain,
        I mean his title; to murder his estate,
        Stifle his right in some detested prison:
        There are means and ways enow to hook in gentry,
        Besides our deadly enmity, which thus stands,
        They’re busy ’bout our wives, we ’bout their lands.
          SHO. Your revenge is more glorious.
        To be a cuckold is but for one life;
        When land remains to you, your heir, or wife.
          QUO. Ah, sirrah, do we sting ’em? This fresh gallant
        Rode newly up before me.
          SHO. I beseech his name.
          QUO. Young master Easy.
          SHO. Easy? it may fall right.
          QUO. I have inquired his haunt—stay,—hah! ay, that ’tis,
        that’s he, that’s he!
          SHO. Happily!
          QUO. Observe, take surely note of him; he’s fresh
        and free: shift thyself speedily into the shape of
        gallantry:[953] I’ll swell thy purse with angels.[954]
        Keep foot by foot with him, outdare his expenses,
        flatter, dice, and brothel to him; give him a sweet
        taste of sensuality; train him to every wasteful sin,
        that he may quickly need health, but especially money;
        ravish him with a dame or two,—be his bawd for once,
        I’ll be thine for ever;—drink drunk with him, creep into
        bed to him, kiss him, and undo him, my sweet spirit.
          SHO. Let your care dwell in me; soon shall it shine:
        What subtilty’s[955] in man that is not mine?
          QUO. O my most cheerful spirit! go, despatch.
                    [_Exit_ SHORTYARD.
        Gentry is the chief fish we tradesmen catch.   [_Exit._
          EASY. What’s here?
          SALE. O, they are bills[956] for chambers.
          EASY [_reads_]. _Against St. Andrew’s, at a painter’s
        house, there’s a fair chamber ready furnished to be let;
        the house not only endued with a new fashion forepart,
        but, which is more convenient for a gentleman, with a
        very provident back door._
          SALE. Why, here’s virtue still: I like that thing that’s
        necessary as well as pleasant.
          COCK. What news in yonder paper?
          REAR. Hah! seek you for news? there’s for you!

         _Enter_ LETHE, _who remains behind reading the bills_.

          SALE. Who’s this?[957]
        In the name of the black angels, Andrew Gruel!
          REAR. No, Andrew Lethe.
          SALE. Lethe?
          REAR. Has forgot[958] his father’s name,
        Poor Walter Gruel, that begot him, fed him,
        And brought him up.
          SALE. Not hither.
          REAR. No;
        ’Twas from his thoughts; he brought him up below.
          SALE. But does he pass for Lethe?
          REAR. ’Mongst strange eyes,
        That no more know him than he knows himself,
        That’s nothing now; for master Andrew Lethe,
        A gentleman of most received parts,
        Forgetfulness, lust, impudence, and falsehood,
        And one especial courtly quality,
        To wit, no wit at all. I am his rival
        For Quomodo’s daughter; but he knows it not.
          SALE. Has spied us o’er his paper.
          REAR. O, that’s a warning
        To make our duties ready.
          COCK. Salute him? hang him!
          REAR. Pooh, wish his health awhile; he’ll be laid
             shortly:
        Let him gorge venison for a time, our doctors
        Will bring him to dry mutton. Seem respective,[959]
        To make his pride swell like a toad with dew.
                                         [LETHE _comes forward_.
          SALE. Master Lethe.
          REAR. Sweet master Lethe.
          LET. Gentlemen, your pardon; I remember you not.
          SALE. Why, we supt with you last night, sir.
          LET. O, cry you mercy! ’tis so long ago,
        I’d[960] quite forgot you; I must be forgiven.
        Acquaintance, dear society, suits, and things,
        Do so flow to me,
        That had I not the better memory,
        ’Twould be a wonder I should know myself.
        Esteem is made of such a dizzy metal;
        I have receiv’d of many gifts o’er night,
        Whom I’ve[961] forgot ere morning: meeting the men,
        I wish’d ’em to remember me agen:[962]
        They do so; then if I forget agen,
        I know what help’d before, that will help then:
        This is my course; for memory I’ve been told
        Twenty preserves; the best I find is gold;
        Ay, truly! Are you not knights yet, gentlemen?
          SALE. Not yet.
          LET. No? that must be looked into; ’tis your own fault.
        I have some store of venison: where shall we devour it,
        gentlemen?
          SALE. The Horn were a fit place.
          LET. For venison fit:
        The horn having chas’d it,
        At the Horn we’ll——
        Rhyme to that?
          COCK. Taste it.
          SALE. Waste it.
          REAR. Cast it.
          LET. That’s the true rhyme indeed! we hunt our venison
        twice, I tell you; first out a’ th’ park, next out a’
        th’ belly.
          COCK. First dogs take pains to make it fit for men,
        Then men take pains[963] to make it fit for dogs.
          LET. Right.
          COCK. Why, this [is] kindness; a kind gallant you,
        And love to give the dogs more than their due:
        We shall attend you, sir.
          LET. I pray do so.
          SALE. The Horn.
          LET. Easily remember’d that, you know.
                                     [_Exeunt all except_ LETHE.
         But now unto my present business. The daughter yields,
        and Quomodo consents; only my mistress Quomodo, her
        mother, without regard runs full against me, and sticks
        hard. Is there no law for a woman that will run upon a
        man at her own apperil?[964] Why should not she consent,
        knowing my state, my sudden fortunes? I can command a
        custard, and other bake-meats, death of sturgeon:[965] I
        could keep house with nothing. What friends have I! how
        well am I beloved! e’en quite throughout the scullery.
        Not consent? ’tis e’en as I have writ: I’ll be hanged,
        and[966] she love me not herself, and would rather
        preserve me, as a private friend, to her own pleasures,
        than any way advance her daughter upon me to beguile
        herself. Then how have I relieved her in that point? let
        me peruse this letter. [_Reads_]—_Good mistress Quomodo,
        or rather, as I hope ere the term end, mother Quomodo,
        since only your consent keeps aloof off,[967] and
        hinders the copulation of your daughter, what may I
        think, but that it is a mere affection in you, doating
        upon some small inferior virtue of mine, to draw me in
        upon yourself? If the case stand so, I have comfort for
        you; for this you may well assure yourself, that by the
        marriage of your daughter I have the better means
        and opportunity to yourself, and without the least
        suspicion._—This is moving stuff, and that works best
        with a citizen’s wife: but who shall I get to convey
        this now? My page I ha’ lent forth; my pander I have
        employed about the country to look out some third
        sister, or entice some discontented gentlewoman from her
        husband, whom the laying out of my appetite shall
        maintain. Nay, I’ll deal like an honourable gentleman,
        I’ll be kind to women; that which I gather i’ th’ day,
        I’ll put into their purses at night. You shall have no
        cause to rail at me; no, faith: I’ll keep you in good
        fashion, ladies; no meaner men than knights shall ransom
        home your gowns and recover your smocks: I’ll not dally
        with you.—Some poor[968] widow woman would come as a
        necessary bawd now! and see where fitly comes—

                         _Enter_ MOTHER GRUEL.

        my mother! Curse of poverty! does she come up to shame
        me, to betray my birth, and cast soil upon my new suit?
        Let her pass me; I’ll take no notice of her,—scurvy
        murrey kersey![969]
          MOTH. G. By your leave, and[970] like your worship——
          LET. Then I must proudly venture it.—To me, good woman?
          MOTH. G. I beseech one word with your worship.
          LET. Prithee, be brief then.
          MOTH. G. Pray, can your worship tell me any tidings of
        one Andrew Gruel, a poor son of mine own?
          LET. I know a gallant gentleman of the name, one master
        Andrew Gruel, and well received amongst ladies.
          MOTH. G. That’s not he, then: he is no gentleman that I
        mean.
          LET. Good woman, if he be a Gruel, he’s a gentleman i’
        th’ mornings, that’s a gentleman a’ th’ first; you
        cannot tell me.
          MOTH. G. No, truly; his father was an honest, upright
        tooth-drawer.
          LET. O my teeth!
          MOTH. G. An’t please your worship, I have made a sore
        journey out, all this vacant time, to come up and see my
        son Andrew. Poor Walter Gruel, his father, has laid his
        life, and left me a lone woman; I have not one husband
        in all the world: therefore my coming up is for relief,
        an’t like your worship, hoping that my son Andrew is in
        some place about the kitchen.
          LET. Kitchen! pooh, faugh!
          MOTH. G. Or a serving-man to some knight of worship.
          LET. O, let me not endure her! [_Aside._]—Know you not
        me, good woman?
          MOTH. G. Alas, an’t please your worship, I never saw
        such a glorious suit since the hour I was kersened.[971]
          LET. Good, she knows me not; my glory does
             disguise[972] me;
        Beside, my poorer name being drench’d in Lethe,
        She’ll hardly understand me. What a fresh air can do!
        I may employ her as a private drudge,
        To pass my letters and secure my lust;
        And ne’er be noted mine, to shame my blood,
        And drop my staining birth upon my raiment.—  [_Aside._
         Faith, good woman, you will hardly get to the speech of
        master Andrew, I tell you.
          MOTH. G. No? marry, hang him! and[973] like your
        worship, I have known the day when nobody cared to speak
        to him.
          LET. You must take heed how you speak ill of him, I can
        tell you, now; he’s so employed.
          MOTH. G. Employed? for what?
          LET. For his ’haviour, wisdom, and other virtues.
          MOTH. G. He, virtues? no, ’tis well known his father was
        too poor a man to bring him up to any virtues; he can
        scarce write and read.
          LET. He’s the better regarded for that amongst
        courtiers, for that’s but a needy quality.
          MOTH. G. If it be so, then he’ll be great shortly, for
        he has no good parts about him.
          LET. Well, good woman, or mother, or what you will——
          MOTH. G. Alack the day! I know your worship scorns to
        call me mother; ’tis not a thing fit for your worship
        indeed, such a simple old woman as I am.
          LET. In pity of thy long journey, there’s sixpence
        British: tend upon me; I have business for you.
          MOTH. G. I’ll wait upon your worship.
          LET. Two pole off at least.
          MOTH. G. I am a clean old woman, an’t like your worship.
          LET. It goes not by cleanness here, good woman; if you
        were fouler, so you were braver,[974] you might come
        nearer.                                         [_Exit._
          MOTH. G. Nay, and[975] that be the fashion, I hope I
        shall get it shortly; there’s no woman so old but she
        may learn: and as an old lady delights in a young page
        or monkey, so there are young courtiers will be hungry
        upon an old woman, I warrant you.               [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

               _Enter_ HELLGILL[976] _and_ COUNTRY WENCH.

          HELL. Come, leave your puling and sighing.
          COUN. W. Beshrew you now, why did you entice me from my
        father?
          HELL. Why? to thy better advancement. Wouldst thou, a
        pretty, beautiful, juicy squall, live in a poor
        thrummed[977] house i’ th’ country, in such servile
        habiliments, and may well pass for a gentlewoman i’ th’
        city? does not five hundred do so, thinkest thou, and
        with worse faces? O, now in these latter days, the devil
        reigning, ’tis an age for cloven creatures! But why sad
        now? yet indeed ’tis the fashion of any courtesan to be
        sea-sick i’ th’ first voyage; but at next she proclaims
        open wars, like a beaten soldier. Why, Northamptonshire
        lass, dost dream of virginity now? remember a loose-
        bodied gown,[978] wench, and let it go; wires and tires,
        bents and bums,[979] felts and falls, thou that shalt
        deceive the world, that gentlewomen indeed shall not be
        known from others. I have a master, to whom I must
        prefer thee after the aforesaid deckening; Lethe by
        name, a man of one most admired property; he can both
        love thee, and for thy better advancement, be thy pander
        himself; an excellent spark of humility.
          COUN. W. Well, heaven forgive you! you train me up to’t.
          HELL. Why, I do acknowledge it, and I think I do you a
        pleasure in’t.
          COUN. W. And if I should prove a harlot now, I should be
        bound to curse you.
          HELL. Bound? nay, and[980] you prove a harlot, you’ll be
        loose enough.
          COUN. W. If I had not a desire to go like a gentlewoman,
        you should be hanged ere you should get me to’t, I
        warrant you.
          HELL. Nay, that’s certain, nor a thousand more of you; I
        know you are all chaste enough till one thing or other
        tempt you: deny[981] a satin gown and[982] you dare now?
          COUN. W. You know I have no power to do’t, and that
        makes you so wilful; for what woman is there such a
        beast that will deny any thing[983] that is good?
          HELL. True; they will not, most[984] dissembler.
          COUN. W. No; and[985] she bear a brave mind, she will
        not, I warrant you.
          HELL. Why, therefore take heart, faint not at all;
        Women ne’er rise but when they fall:
        Let a man break, he’s gone, blown up;
        A woman’s breaking sets her up:
        Virginity is no city trade,
        You’re out a’ th’ freedom when you’re a maid:
        Down with the lattice, ’tis but thin;
        Let coarser beauties work within,
        Whom the light mocks; thou art fair and fresh;
        The gilded flies will light upon thy flesh.
          COUN. W. Beshrew your sweet enchantments, you have
             won!
          HELL. How easily soft women are undone!
        So farewell wholesome weeds, where treasure pants;[986]
        And welcome silks, where lie[987] disease and wants!
                                                       [_Aside._

        Come, wench; now flow thy fortunes in to bless thee;
        I’ll bring thee where thou shalt be taught to dress
           thee.
          COUN. W. O, as soon as may be! I am in a swoon till I be
        a gentlewoman; and you know what flesh is man’s meat
        till it be dressed?
          HELL. Most certain, no more; a woman.      [_Exeunt._




                            ACT II. SCENE I.


                          _An Ordinary._[988]

            REARAGE, SALEWOOD, LETHE, EASY, _and_ SHORTYARD,
                  _discovered at dice: Boy attending_.

          REAR. Gentlemen, I ha’ sworn I’ll change the room.
        Dice? devils!
          LET. You see I’m patient, gentlemen.
          SALE. Ay, the fiend’s in’t! you’re patient; you put up
        all.
          REAR. Come, set me, gentlemen!
          SHO. An Essex gentleman, sir.
          EASY. An unfortunate one, sir.
          SHO. I’m bold to salute you, sir: you know not master
        Alsup there?
          EASY. O, entirely well.
          SHO. Indeed, sir?
          EASY. He’s second to my bosom.
          SHO. I’ll give you that comfort then, sir, you must not
        want money as long as you are in town, sir.
          EASY. No, sir?
          SHO. I am bound in my love to him to see you furnished;
        and in that comfort I recover my salute again, sir.
          EASY. Then I desire to be more dear unto you.
          SHO. I rather study to be dear unto you. [_Aside._]—Boy,
        fill some wine.—I knew not what fair impressure[989] I
        received at first, but I began to affect your society
        very speedily.
          EASY. I count myself the happier.
          SHO. To master Alsup, sir; to whose remembrance I could
        love to drink till I were past remembrance.  [_Drinks._
          EASY. I shall keep Christmas with him, sir, where your
        health shall likewise undoubtedly be remembered; and
        thereupon I pledge you. [_Drinks._] I would sue for your
        name, sir.
          SHO. Your suit shall end in one term, sir; my name is
        Blastfield.
          EASY. Kind master Blastfield, your dearer acquaintance.
          [_Drinks._
          REAR. Nay, come, will ye draw in, gentlemen? set me.
          EASY. Faith, I’m scattered.
          SHO. Sir, you shall not give out so meanly of yourself
        in my company for a million: make such privy to your
        disgrace! you’re a gentleman of fair fortunes; keep me
        your reputation: set ’em all; there’s crowns for you.
                                            [_Giving him money._
          EASY. Sir, you bind me infinitely in these courtesies.
          SHO. You must always have a care of your reputation here
        in town, master Easy: although you ride down with
        nothing, it skills[990] not.
          EASY. I’m glad you tell me that yet, then I’m
        indifferent.—Well, come; who throws? I set all these.
          SHO. Why, well said.
          SALE. This same master Lethe here begins to undo us
        again.
          LET. Ah, sir, I came not hither but to win!
          SHO. And then you’ll leave us; that’s your fashion.
          LET. He’s base that visits not his friends.
          SHO. But he’s more base that carries out his winnings;
        None will do so but those have base beginnings.
          LET. It is a thing in use, and ever was.
        I pass this time.
          SHO. I wonder you should pass,
        And that you’re suffer’d.
          LET. Tut, the dice are ours;
        Then wonder not at those that have most powers.
          REAR. The devil and his angels!
          LET. Are these they?
        Welcome, dear angels![991] where you’re curs’d ne’er
           stay.
          SALE. Here’s luck!
          EASY. Let’s search him, gentlemen; I think he wears a
        smock.[992]
          SHO. I knew the time he wore not half a shirt,
        Just like a pea.
          EASY. No? how did he for the rest?
          SHO. Faith, he compounded with a couple of napkins at
        Barnet, and so trussed up the lower parts.
          EASY. ’Twas a pretty shift, i’faith!
          SHO. But master Lethe has forgot that too.
          EASY. A mischief on’t, to lose all! I could——
          SHO. Nay, but, good master Easy, do not do yourself that
        tyranny, I beseech you; I must not ha’ you alter your
        body now for the purge of a little money: you undo me,
        and[993] you do.

          EASY. ’Twas all I brought up with me, I protest, master
        Blastfield; all my rent till next quarter.
          SHO. Pox of money! talk not on’t, I beseech you,—what
        said I to you? mass, I am out of cash myself too.—Boy.
          BOY. Anon, sir.
          SHO. Run presently to master Gum the mercer, and
        will[994], him to tell out two or three hundred pound
        for me, or more, according as he is furnished: I’ll
        visit him i’ th’ morning, say.
          BOY. It shall be said, sir.                 [_Going._
          SHO. Do you hear, boy?
          BOY. Yes, sir.
          SHO. If master Gum be not sufficiently ready, call upon
        master Profit the goldsmith.
          BOY. It shall be done, sir.                 [_Going._
          SHO. Boy.
          BOY. I knew[995] I was not sent yet; now is the time.
                                 [_Aside._
          SHO. Let them both rest till another occasion; you shall
        not need to run so far at this time; take one nigher
        hand; go to master Quomodo the draper, and will him to
        furnish me instantly.
          BOY. Now I go, sir.                          [_Exit._
          EASY. It seems you’re well known, master Blastfield, and
        your credit very spacious here i’ th’ city.
          SHO. Master Easy, let a man bear himself portly, the
        whorsons will creep to him a’ their bellies, and their
        wives a’ their backs: there’s a kind of bold grace
        expected throughout all the parts of a gentleman. Then
        for your observances, a man must not so much as spit but
        within line and fashion. I tell you what I ha’ done:
        sometimes I carry my water all London over only to
        deliver it proudly at the Standard;[996] and do I pass
        altogether unnoted, think you? no, a man can no sooner
        peep out his head but there’s a bow bent at him out of
        some watch-tower or other.
          EASY. So readily, sir?
          SHO. Push,[997] you know a bow’s quickly ready, though a
        gun be long a-charging, and will shoot five times to his
        once. Come, you shall bear yourself jovially: take heed
        of setting your looks to your losses, but rather smile
        upon your ill luck, and invite ’em to-morrow to another
        breakfast of bones.
          EASY. Nay, I’ll forswear dicing.
          SHO. What? peace, I am ashamed to hear you: will you
        cease in the first loss? shew me one gentleman that e’er
        did it. Fie upon’t, I must use you to company, I
        perceive; you’d be spoiled else. Forswear dice! I would
        your friends heard you, i’faith!
          EASY. Nay, I was but in jest, sir.
          SHO. I hope so: what would gentlemen say of you? there
        goes a gull that keeps his money! I would not have such
        a report go on you for the world, as long as you are in
        my company. Why, man, fortune alters in a minute; I ha’
        known those have recovered so much in an hour, their
        purses were never sick after.
          REAR. O, worse than consumption of the liver!
        consumption of the patrimony!
          SHO. How now? Mark their humours, master Easy.
          REAR. Forgive me, my posterity yet ungotten!
          SHO. That’s a penitent maudlin dicer.
          REAR. Few know the sweets that the plain life allows:
        Vild[998] son that surfeits of his father’s brows!
          SHO. Laugh at him, master Easy.
          EASY. Ha, ha, ha!
          SALE. I’ll be damned, and[999] these be not the bones of
        some quean that cozened me in her life, and now consumes
        me after her death.
          SHO. That’s the true wicked, blasphemous, and soul-
        shuddering dicer, that will curse you all service-time,
        and attribute his ill luck always to one drab or other!

                           _Enter_ HELLGILL.

          LET. Dick Hellgill? the happy news.
          HELL. I have her for you, sir.
          LET. Peace: what is she?
          HELL. Young, beautiful, and plump; a delicate piece of
        sin.
          LET. Of what parentage?
          HELL. O, a gentlewoman of a great house.
          LET. Fie, fie.
          HELL. She newly came out of a barn—yet too good for a
        tooth-drawer’s son.                           [_Aside._
          LET. Is she wife or maid?
          HELL. That which is daintiest, maid.
          LET. I’d rather she’d been a wife.
          HELL. A wife, sir? why?
          LET. O, adultery is a great deal sweeter in my mind.
          HELL. Diseases gnaw thy bones!              [_Aside._
        I think she has deserv’d to be a wife, sir.
          LET. That will move well.
          HELL. Her firstlings shall be mine:
        Swine look but for the husks; the meat be thine.

                            _Re-enter Boy._

          SHO. How now, boy?
          BOY. Master Quomodo takes your worship’s greeting
        exceeding kindly, and in his commendations returns this
        answer, that your worship shall not be so apt to receive
        it as he willing to lend it.
          SHO. Why, we thank him, i’faith.
          EASY. Troth, and you ha’ reason to thank him, sir; ’twas
        a very friendly answer.
          SHO. Push,[1000] a gentleman that keeps his days even
        here i’ th’ city, as I myself watch to do, shall have
        many of those answers in a twelvemonth, master Easy.
          EASY. I promise you, sir, I admire your carriage, and
        begin to hold a more reverend respect of you.
          SHO. Not so, I beseech you; I give my friends leave to
        be inward[1001] with me.—Will you walk, gentlemen?
          LET. We’re for you.—
        Present her with this jewel, my first token.
                                    [_Giving jewel to_ HELLGILL.

                            _Enter Drawer._

          DRA. There are certain countrymen without, inquiring
        for master Rearage and master Salewood.
          REAR. Tenants?
          SALE. Thou revivest us, rascal.
          REAR. When’s our next meeting, gentlemen?
          SHO. To-morrow night;
        This gentleman, by me, invites you all.—
        Do you not, master Easy?
          EASY. Freely, sir.
          SALE. We do embrace your love.—A pure, fresh gull.
                                                       [_Aside._
          SHO. Thus make you men at parting dutiful,
        And rest beholding[1002] to you; ’tis the slight,[1003]
        To be remember’d when you’re out of sight.
          EASY. A pretty virtue!                     [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                  _Enter the Country Wench’s Father._

          FATH. Where shall I seek her now? O, if she knew
        The dangers that attend on women’s lives,
        She’d[1004] rather lodge under a poor thatch’d roof
        Than under carved ceilings! She was my joy,
        And all content that I receiv’d from life,
        My dear and only daughter.
        What says the note she left? let me again
        With staider grief peruse it.

          [_Reads._] _Father, wonder not at my so sudden
        departure, without your leave or knowledge. Thus, under
        pardon, I excuse it: had you had knowledge of it, I know
        you would have sought to restrain it, and hinder me from
        what I have long desired. Being now happily preferred to
        a gentleman’s service in London, about Holborn, if you
        please to send, you may hear well of me._
         As false as she is disobedient!
        I’ve made larger inquiry, left no place
        Where gentry keeps[1005] unsought, yet cannot hear;
        Which drives me most into a shameful fear.
        Woe worth th’ infected cause that makes me visit
        This man-devouring city! where I spent
        My unshapen youth, to be my age’s curse,
        And surfeited away my name and state
        In swinish riots, that now, being sober,
        I do awake a beggar: I may hate her:
        Whose youth voids wine, his age is curs’d with water.
        O heavens, I know the price of ill too well!
        What the confusions are in whom they dwell,
        And how soon maids are to their ruins won,
        One minute, and eternally undone;
        So in mine may it: may it not be thus!
        Though she be poor, her honour’s precious.
        May be my present form, and her fond[1006] fear,
        May chase her from me, if her eye should get me;
        And therefore, as my love and wants advise,
        I’ll serve, until I find her, in disguise.
        Such is my care to fright her from base evils,
        I leave calm state to live amongst you, devils.
                                                        [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                           QUOMODO’S _Shop_.

              _Enter_ THOMASINE[1007] _and_ MOTHER GRUEL.

          THO. Were these fit words, think you, to be sent to any
        citizen’s wife,—to enjoy the daughter, and love the
        mother too for a need? I would foully scorn that man
        that should love me only for a need, I tell you. And
        here the knave writes again, that by the marriage of my
        daughter, ’a has the better means and opportunity to
        myself: he lies in his throat, like a villain; he has no
        opportunity of me for all that; ’tis for his betters to
        have opportunity of me, and that he shall well know. A
        base, proud knave! ’a has forgot how he came up and
        brought two of his countrymen to give their words to my
        husband for a suit of green kersey; ’a has forgot all
        this: and how does he appear to me when his white satin
        suit’s on, but like a maggot crept out of a nutshell—a
        fair body and a foul neck: those parts that are covered
        of him look[1008] indifferent well, because we cannot
        see ’em; else, for all his cleansing, pruning, and
        paring, he’s not worthy a broker’s daughter; and so tell
        him.
          MOTH. G. I will indeed, forsooth.
          THO. And as for my child, I hope she’ll be ruled in
        time, though she be foolish yet, and not be carried away
        with a cast of manchets,[1009] a bottle of wine, or a
        custard:[1010] and so, I pray, certify him.
          MOTH. G. I’ll do your errand effectually.
          THO. Art thou his aunt,[1011] or his——
          MOTH. G. Alas, I am a poor drudge of his!
          THO. Faith, and[1012] thou wert his mother, he would
        make thee his drudge, I warrant him.
          MOTH. G. Marry, out upon him! sir-reverence[1013] of
        your mistress-ship.
          THO. Here’s somewhat for thy pains: fare thee well.
                                                [_Giving money._
          MOTH. G. ’Tis more than he gave me since I came to him.
                                                        [_Exit._

                      _Enter_ QUOMODO _and_ SUSAN.

          QUO. How now? what prating have we here? whispers?
        dumbshows? Why, Thomasine, go to: my shop is not
        altogether so dark[1014] as some of my neighbours’,
        where a man may be made cuckold at one end, while he’s
        measuring with his yard at t’other.
          THO. Only commendations sent from master Lethe, your
        worshipful son-in-law that should be.
          QUO. O, and that you like not! he that can make us rich
        in custom, strong in friends, happy in suits; bring us
        into all the rooms a’ Sundays, from the leads to the
        cellar; pop us in with venison till we crack again, and
        send home the rest in an honourable napkin: this man you
        like not, forsooth.
          SUS. But I like him, father.
          QUO. My blessing go with thy liking!
          SUS. A number of our citizens hold our credit by’t, to
        come home drunk, and say, we ha’ been at court: then how
        much more credit is’t to be drunk there indeed!
          QUO. Tut, thy mother’s a fool.—Pray, what’s master
        Rearage, whom you plead for so?
          THO. Why, first, he is a gentleman.
          QUO. Ay, he’s often first a gentleman that’s last a
        beggar.
          SUS. My father tells you true: what should I do with a
        gentleman? I know not which way to lie with him.
          QUO. ’Tis true, too. Thou knowest, beside, we undo
        gentlemen daily.
          THO. That makes so few of ’em marry with our daughters,
        unless it be one green fool or other. Next, master
        Rearage has land and living; t’other but his walk i’ th’
        street, and his snatching diet: he’s able to entertain
        you in a fair house of his own; t’other in some nook or
        corner, or place us behind the cloth,[1015] like a
        company of puppets: at his house you shall be served
        curiously, sit down and eat your meat with leisure;
        there we must be glad to take it standing, and without
        either salt, cloth, or trencher, and say we are
        befriended too.
          QUO. O, that gives a citizen a better appetite than his
        garden.
          SUS. So say I, father; methinks it does me most good
        when I take it standing: I know not how all women’s
        minds are.

                          _Enter_ FALSELIGHT.

          QUO. Faith, I think they are all of thy mind for that
        thing.—How now, Falselight?
          FAL. I have descried my fellow Shortyard, alias
        Blastfield, at hand with the gentleman.
          QUO. O my sweet Shortyard!—Daughter, get you up to your
        virginals.[1016] [_Exit_ SUSAN.]—By your leave, mistress
        Quomodo——
          THO. Why, I hope I may sit i’ th’ shop, may I not?
          QUO. That you may, and welcome, sweet honey-thigh, but
        not at this season; there’s a buck to be struck.
          THO. Well, since I’m so expressly forbidden, I’ll watch
        above i’ th’ gallery, but I’ll see your knavery.
                          [_Aside, and exit._
          QUO. Be you prepared as I tell you.
          FAL. You ne’er feared me.           [_Retires._[1017]
          QUO. O that sweet, neat, comely, proper, delicate,
        parcel of land! like a fine gentlewoman i’ th’ waist,
        not so great as pretty, pretty; the trees in summer
        whistling, the silver waters by the banks harmoniously
        gliding. I should have been a scholar; an excellent
        place for a student; fit for my son that lately
        commenced at Cambridge, whom now I have placed at inns
        of court. Thus we that seldom get lands honestly, must
        leave our heirs to inherit our knavery: but, whist; one
        turn about my shop, and meet with ’em.

                     _Enter_ EASY _and_ SHORTYARD.

          EASY. Is this it, sir?
          SHO. Ay; let me see; this is it; sign of Three Knaves;
        ’tis it.
          QUO. Do you hear, sir? what lack you,[1018] gentlemen?
        see good kerseys or broadcloths here; I pray come
        near—master Blastfield!
          SHO. I thought you would know me anon.

                       _Enter_ THOMASINE _above_.

          QUO. You’re exceeding welcome to town, sir: your
        worship must pardon me; ’tis always misty weather in our
        shops here; we are a nation the sun ne’er shines upon.
        Came this gentleman with you?
          SHO. O, salute him fairly; he’s a kind gentleman, a very
        inward[1019] of mine.
          QUO. Then I cry you mercy, sir; you’re especially
        welcome.
          EASY. I return you thanks, sir.
          QUO. But how shall I do for you now, master Blastfield?
          SHO. Why, what’s the matter?
          QUO. It is my greatest affliction at this instant, I am
        not able to furnish you.
          SHO. How, master Quomodo? pray, say not so; ’slud, you
        undo me then.
          QUO. Upon my religion, master Blastfield, bonds lie
        forfeit in my hands; I expect the receipt of a thousand
        every hour, and cannot yet set eye of a penny.
          SHO. That’s strange, methinks.
          QUO. ’Tis mine own pity that plots against me, master
        Blastfield; they know I have no conscience to take the
        forfeiture, and that makes ’em so bold with my mercy.
          EASY. I am sorry for this.
          QUO. Nevertheless, if I might entreat your delay but the
        age of three days, to express my sorrow now, I would
        double the sum, and supply you with four or five
        hundred.
          SHO. Let me see; three days?
          QUO. Ay, good sir, and[1020] it may be possible.
          EASY. Do you hear, master Blastfield?
          SHO. Hah?
          EASY. You know I’ve already invited all the gallants to
        sup with me to-night.
          SHO. That’s true, i’faith.
          EASY. ’Twill be my everlasting shame if I have no money
        to maintain my bounty.
          SHO. I ne’er thought upon that.—I looked still when that
        should come from him. [_Aside._]—We have strictly
        examined our expenses; it must not be three days, master
        Quomodo.
          QUO. No? then I’m afraid ’twill be my grief, sir.
          EASY. Master Blastfield, I’ll tell you what you may do
        now.
          SHO. What, good sweet bedfellow?[1021]
          EASY. Send to master Gum,[1022] or master Profit, the
        mercer and goldsmith.

          SHO. Mass, that was well remembered of thee.—I perceive
        the trout will be a little troublesome ere he be
        catched. [_Aside._]—Boy.

                              _Enter Boy._

          BOY. Here, sir.
          SHO. Run to master Gum, or master Profit, and carry my
        present occasion of money to ’em.
          BOY. I run, sir.                             [_Exit._
          QUO. Methinks, master Blastfield, you might easily
        attain to the satisfaction of three days: here’s a
        gentleman, your friend, I dare say will see you
        sufficiently possessed till then.
          EASY. Not I, sir, by no means: master Blastfield knows
        I’m further in want than himself: my hope rests all upon
        him; it stands upon the loss of my credit to-night, if I
        walk[1023] without money.
          SHO. Why, master Quomodo, what a fruitless motion have
        you put forth! you might well assure yourself this
        gentleman had it not, if I wanted it: why, our purses
        are brothers; we desire but equal fortunes: in a word,
        we’re man and wife; they can but lie together, and so do
        we.
          EASY. As near as can be, i’faith.
          SHO. And, to say truth, ’tis more for the continuing of
        this gentleman’s credit in town, than any incitement
        from mine own want only, that I covet to be so
        immediately furnished: you shall hear him confess as
        much himself.
          EASY. ’Tis most certain, master Quomodo.

                            _Re-enter Boy._

        ᚩSHO. O, here comes the boy now.—How now, boy? what says
        master Gum or master Profit?
          BOY. Sir, they’re both walked forth this frosty morning
        to Brainford,[1024] to see a nurse-child.
          SHO. A bastard be it! spite and shame!
          EASY. Nay, never vex yourself, sweet master Blastfield.
          SHO. Bewitched, I think.
          QUO. Do you hear, sir? you can persuade with him?
          EASY. A little, sir.
          QUO. Rather than he should be altogether destitute, or
        be too much a vexation to himself, he shall take up a
        commodity[1025] of cloth of me, tell him.
          EASY. Why, la! by my troth, ’twas kindly spoken.
          QUO. Two hundred pounds’ worth, upon my religion, say.
          SHO. So disastrously!
          EASY. Nay, master Blastfield, you do not hear what
        master Quomodo said since, like an honest, true citizen,
        i’faith; rather than you should grow diseased[1026]
        upon’t, you shall take up a commodity of two hundred
        pounds’ worth of cloth.
          SHO. The mealy moth consume it! would he ha’ me turn
        pedlar now? what should I do with cloth?
          QUO. He’s a very wilful gentleman at this time, i’faith:
        he knows as well what to do with it as I myself, i-
        wis.[1027] There’s no merchant in town but will be
        greedy upon’t, and pay down money upo’ th’ nail; they’ll
        despatch it over to Middleburgh presently, and raise
        double commodity by exchange: if not, you know ’tis
        term-time, and Michaelmas term too, the drapers’ harvest
        for foot-cloths,[1028] riding-suits, walking-suits,
        chamber-gowns, and hall-gowns.
          EASY. Nay, I’ll say that, it comes in as fit a time as
        can be.
          QUO. Nay, take me with you[1029] again ere you go, sir:
        I offer him no trash, tell him, but present money, say:
        where[1030] I know some gentlemen in town ha’ been glad,
        and are glad at this time, to take up commodities in
        hawks’ hoods and brown paper.[1031]
          EASY. O horrible! are there such fools in town?
          QUO. I offer him no trash, tell him; upon my religion,
        you may say.—Now, my sweet Shortyard; now the hungry
        fish begins to nibble; one end of the worm is in his
        mouth, i’faith.                               [_Aside._
          THO. Why stand I here (as late our graceless
             dames,[1032]
        That found no eyes), to see that gentleman
        Alive, in state and credit, executed,
        Help to rip up himself does all he can?
        Why am I wife to him that is no man?
        I suffer in that gentleman’s confusion.       [_Aside._
          EASY. Nay, be persuaded in that, master Blastfield; ’tis
        ready money at the merchant’s: beside, the winter season
        and all falls in as pat as can be to help it.
          SHO. Well, master Easy, none but you could have
        persuaded me to that.—Come, would you would despatch
        then, master Quomodo: where’s this cloth?
          QUO. Full and whole within, all of this piece, of my
        religion, master Blastfield. Feel’t; nay, feel’t, and
        spare not, gentlemen, your fingers and your judgment.
          SHO. Cloth’s good.
          EASY. By my troth, exceeding good cloth; a good
        wale[1033] ’t’as.
          QUO. Falselight.
          FAL. I’m ne’er out a’ the shop, sir.
          QUO. Go, call in a porter presently, to carry away the
        cloth with the star-mark.—Whither will you please to
        have it carried, master Blastfield?
          SHO. Faith, to master Beggarland, he’s the only merchant
        now; or his brother, master Stilliarddown; there’s
        little difference.
          QUO. You’ve happened upon the money-men, sir; they and
        some of their brethren, I can tell you, will not stick
        to offer thirty thousand pound to be cursed still:
        great monied men, their stocks lie in the poors’
        throats. But you’ll see me sufficiently discharged,
        master Blastfield, ere you depart?
          SHO. You have always found me righteous in that.
          QUO. Falselight.
          FAL. Sir?
          QUO. You may bring a scrivener along with you.
          FAL. I’ll remember that, sir.                [_Exit._
          QUO. Have you sent for a citizen, master Blastfield?
          SHO. No, faith, not yet.—Boy.
          EASY. What must you do with a citizen, sir?
          SHO. A custom they’re bound to a’ late by the default of
        evil debtors; no citizen must lend money without two be
        bound in the bond; the second man enters but for custom
        sake.
          EASY. No? and must he needs be a citizen?
          SHO. By th’ mass, stay; I’ll learn that.—Master
        Quomodo——
          QUO. Sir?
          SHO. Must the second party, that enters into bond only
        for fashion’s sake, needs be a citizen? what say you to
        this gentleman for one?
          QUO. Alas, sir! you know he’s a mere stranger to me: I
        neither am sure of his going or abiding; he may inn here
        to-night, and ride away to-morrow: although I grant the
        chief burden lies upon you, yet we are bound to make
        choice of those we know, sir.
          SHO. Why, he’s a gentleman of a pretty living, sir.
          QUO. It may be so; yet, under both your pardons, I’d
        rather have a citizen.
          EASY. I hope you will not disparage me so: ’tis well
        known I have three hundred pound a-year in Essex.
          SHO. Well said; to him thyself, take him up roundly.
          EASY. And how doubtfully soe’er you account of me, I do
        not think but I might make my bond pass for a hundred
        pound i’ th’ city.
          QUO. What, alone, sir?
          EASY. Alone, sir? who says so? perhaps I’d send down for
        a tenant or two.
          QUO. Ay, that’s another case, sir.
          EASY. Another case let it be then.
          QUO. Nay, grow not into anger, sir.
          EASY. Not take me into a bond! as good as you shall,
        goodman goosecap.
          QUO. Well, master Blastfield, because I will not
        disgrace the gentleman, I’m content for once; but we
        must not make a practice on’t.
          EASY. No, sir, now you would, you shall not.
          QUO. Cuds me, I’m undone! he’s gone again.  [_Aside._
          SHO. The net’s broke.                         [_Aside._
          THO. Hold there, dear gentleman!            [_Aside._
          EASY. Deny me that small courtesy! ’S foot, a very Jew
        will not deny it me.
          THO. Now must I catch him warily.           [_Aside._
          EASY. A jest indeed! not take me into a bond, quo’[1034]
        they.
          SHO. Master Easy, mark my words: if it stood not upon
        the eternal loss of thy credit against supper——
          EASY. Mass, that’s true.
          SHO. The pawning of thy horse for his own victuals——
          EASY. Right, i’faith.
          SHO. And thy utter dissolution amongst gentlemen for
        ever——
          EASY. Pox on’t!
          SHO. Quomodo should hang, rot, stink——
          QUO. Sweet boy, i’faith!                    [_Aside._
          SHO. Drop, damn.
          QUO. Excellent Shortyard!                   [_Aside._
          EASY. I forgot all this: what meant I to swagger before
        I had money in my purse?—How does master Quomodo? is the
        bond ready?
          QUO. O sir!

                            _Enter_ DUSTBOX.

          EASY. Come, we must be friends; here’s my hand.
          QUO. Give it the scrivener: here he comes.
          DUST. Good day, master Quomodo; good morrow, gentlemen.
          QUO. We must require a little aid from your pen, good
        master Dustbox.
          DUST. What be the gentlemen’s names that are bound, sir?
          QUO. [_while_ DUSTBOX _writes_.] Master John Blastfield,
        esquire, i’ th’ wold[1035] of Kent: and—what do they
        call your bedfellow’s[1036] name?
          SHO. Master Richard Easy; you may easily hit on’t.
          QUO. Master Richard Easy, of Essex, gentleman, both
        bound to Ephestian Quomodo, citizen and draper, of
        London; the sum, two hundred pound.—What time do you
        take, master Blastfield, for the payment?
          SHO. I never pass my month, you know.
          QUO. I know it, sir: October sixteenth to-day; sixteenth
        of November, say.
          EASY. Is it your custom to return so soon, sir?
          SHO. I never miss you.

         _Enter_ FALSELIGHT, _disguised as a Porter, sweating_.

          FAL. I am come for the rest of the same price,[1037]
        master Quomodo.
          QUO. Star-mark; this is it: are all the rest gone?
          FAL. They’re all at master Stilliarddown’s by this time.
          EASY. How the poor rascal’s all in a froth!
          SHO. Push,[1038] they’re ordained to sweat for
        gentlemen: porters’ backs and women’s bellies bear up
        the world.
           [_Exit_ FALSELIGHT _with the remainder of the cloth_.
          EASY. ’Tis true, i’faith; they bear men and money, and
        that’s the world.
          SHO. You’ve found it, sir.
          DUST. I’m ready to your hands, gentlemen.
          SHO. Come, master Easy.
          EASY. I beseech you, sir.
          SHO. It shall be yours, I say.
          EASY. Nay, pray, master Blastfield.
          SHO. I will not, i’faith.
          EASY. What do you mean, sir?
          SHO. I should shew little bringing up, to take the way
        of a stranger.
          EASY. By my troth, you do yourself wrong though, master
        Blastfield.
          SHO. Not a whit, sir.
          EASY. But to avoid strife, you shall have your will of
        me for once.
          SHO. Let it be so, I pray.
          QUO. [_while_ EASY _signs the bond_.] Now I begin to set
        one foot upon the land: methinks I am felling of trees
        already: we shall have some Essex logs yet to keep
        Christmas with,[1039] and that’s a comfort.
          THO. Now is he quartering out; the executioner
        Strides over him: with his own blood he writes:
        I am no dame that can endure such sights.
                                       [_Aside, and exit above._
          SHO. So, his right wing is cut; will not fly far
        Past the two city hazards, Poultry and Wood-
           street.[1040]                              [_Aside._
          EASY. How like you my Roman hand, i’faith?
          DUST. Exceeding well, sir, but that you rest too much
        upon your R, and make your ease too little.
          EASY. I’ll mend that presently.
          DUST. Nay, ’tis done now, past mending. [SHORTYARD
        _signs the bond_.]—You both deliver this to master
        Quomodo as your deed?
          SHO. We do, sir.
          QUO. I thank you, gentlemen.
          SHO. Would the coin would come away now! we have
        deserved for’t.

           _Re-enter_ FALSELIGHT _disguised as before_.[1041]

          FAL. By your leave a little, gentlemen.
          SHO. How now? what’s the matter? speak.
          FAL. As fast as I can, sir: all the cloth’s come back
        again.
          QUO. How?
          SHO. What’s the news?
          FAL. The passage to Middleburgh is stopt, and therefore
        neither master Stilliarddown nor master Beggarland, nor
        any other merchant, will deliver present money upon’t.
          QUO. Why, what hard luck have you, gentlemen!
                                             [_Exit_ FALSELIGHT.
          EASY. Why, master Blastfield!
          SHO. Pish!
          EASY. You’re so discontented too presently, a man cannot
        tell how to speak to you.
          SHO. Why, what would you say?
          EASY. We must make somewhat on’t now, sir.
          SHO. Ay, where? how? the best is, it lies all upon my
        neck.—Master Quomodo, can you help me to any money
        for’t? speak.
          QUO. Troth, master Blastfield, since myself is so
        unfurnished, I know’ not the means how: there’s one i’
        th’ street, a new setter up; if any lay out money
        upon’t, ’twill be he.
          SHO. His name?
          QUO. Master Idem: but you know we cannot give but
        greatly to your loss, because we gain and live by’t.
          SHO. ’S foot, will he give any thing?
          EASY. Ay, stand upon that.
          SHO. Will he give any thing? the brokers will give
        nothing: to no purpose.
          QUO. Falselight.

                     _Re-enter_ FALSELIGHT _above_.

          FAL. Over your head, sir.
          QUO. Desire master Idem to come presently, and look upo’
        th’ cloth.
          FAL. I will, sir.                      [_Exit above._
          SHO. What if he should offer but a hundred pound?
          EASY. If he want twenty on’t, let’s take it.
          SHO. Say you so?
          EASY. Master Quomodo, he[1042] will have four or five
        hundred pound for you of his own within three or four
        days.

                           _Enter_ THOMASINE.

          SHO. ’Tis true, he said so indeed.
          EASY. Is that your wife, master Quomodo?
          QUO. That’s she, little Thomasine.
          EASY. Under your leave, sir, I’ll shew myself a
        gentleman.
          QUO. Do, and welcome, master Easy.
          EASY. I have commission for what I do, lady, from your
        husband.                                 [_Kisses her._
          THO. You may have a stronger commission for the next,
        an’t please you, that’s from myself.

                              _Enter_ SIM.

          EASY. You teach me the best law, lady.
          THO. Beshrew my blood, a proper springall[1043] and a
        sweet gentleman.                [_Aside, and exit._
          QUO. My son, Sim Quomodo:—here’s more work for you,
        master Easy; you must salute him too,—for he’s like to
        be heir of thy land, I can tell thee.         [_Aside._
          SIM. _Vim, vitam, spemque salutem._
          QUO. He shews you there he was a Cambridge man, sir; but
        now he’s a Templar: has he not good grace to make a
        lawyer?
          EASY. A very good grace to make a lawyer.
          SHO. For indeed he has no grace at all.     [_Aside._
          QUO. Some gave me counsel to make him a divine——
          EASY. Fie, fie.
          QUO. But some of our livery think it an unfit thing,
        that our own sons should tell us of our vices: others to
        make him a physician; but then, being my heir, I’m
        afraid he would make me away: now, a lawyer they’re all
        willing to, because ’tis good for our trade, and
        increaseth the number of cloth gowns; and indeed ’tis
        the fittest for a citizen’s son, for our word is, What
        do ye lack?[1044] and their word is, What do you give?
          EASY. Exceeding proper.

               _Re-enter_ FALSELIGHT _disguised as_ IDEM.

          QUO. Master Idem, welcome.
          FAL. I have seen the cloth, sir.
          QUO. Very well.
          FAL. I am but a young setter up; the uttermost I dare
        venture upon’t is threescore pound.
          SHO. What?
          FAL. If it be for me so, I am for it; if not, you have
        your cloth, and I have my money.
          EASY. Nay, pray, master Blastfield, refuse not his kind
        offer.
          SHO. A bargain then, master Idem, clap hands.—He’s
        finely cheated! [_Aside._]—Come, let’s all to the next
        tavern, and see the money paid.
          EASY. A match.
          QUO. I follow you, gentlemen; take my son along with
        you. [_Exeunt all but_ QUOMODO.]—Now to my keys: I’m
        master Idem, he[1045] must fetch the money. First have I
        caught him in a bond for two hundred pound, and my two
        hundred pounds’ worth a’ cloth again for threescore
        pound. Admire me, all you students at inns of cozenage.
                                                        [_Exit._




                           ACT III. SCENE I.


                     _The Country Wench’s Lodging._

      _The Country Wench[1046] discovered, dressed gentlewoman-
          like, in a new-fashioned gown: the Tailor points[1047]
          it; while_ MISTRESS COMINGS, _a tirewoman,[1048] is
          busy about her head_: HELLGILL _looking on_.

          HELL. You talk of an alteration: here’s the thing
        itself. What base birth does not raiment make glorious?
        and what glorious births do not rags make infamous? Why
        should not a woman confess what she is now, since the
        finest are but deluding shadows, begot between tirewomen
        and tailors? for instance, behold their parents!
          MIS. C. Say what you will, this wire becomes you
        best.—How say you, tailor?
          TAI. I promise you ’tis a wire would draw me from my
        work seven days a-week.
          COUN. W. Why, do you work a’ Sundays, tailor?
          TAI. Hardest of all a’ Sundays, because we are most
        forbidden.
          COUN. W. Troth, and so do most of us women; the better
        day the better deed, we think.
          MIS. C. Excellent, exceeding, i’faith! a narrow-eared
        wire sets out a cheek so fat and so full: and if you be
        ruled by me, you shall wear your hair still like a mock-
        face behind: ’tis such an Italian world, many men know
        not before from behind.
          TAI. How like you the sitting of this gown now, mistress
        Comings?
          MIS. C. It sits at marvellous good ease and comely
        discretion.
          HELL. Who would think now this fine sophisticated squal
        came out of the bosom of a barn, and the loins of a hay-
        tosser?
          COUN. W. Out, you saucy, pestiferous pander! I scorn
        that, i’faith.
          HELL. Excellent! already the true phrase and style of a
        strumpet. Stay; a little more of the red, and then I
        take my leave of your cheek for four and twenty
        hours.—Do you not think it impossible that her own
        father should know her now, if he saw her?
          COUN. W. Why, I think no less: how can he know me, when
        I scarce know myself?
          HELL. ’Tis right.
          COUN. W. But so well you lay wait for a man for me!
          HELL. I protest I have bestowed much labour about it;
        and in fit time, good news I hope.

           _Enter_ HELLGILL’s _Servant[1049] bringing in the
                   Country Wench’s Father disguised_.

          SER. I’ve found one yet at last, in whose preferment I
        hope to reap credit.
          COUN. W. Is that the fellow?
          SER. Lady, it is.
          COUN. W. Art thou willing to serve me, fellow?
          FATH. So please you, he that has not the heart to serve
        such a mistress as your beautiful self, deserves to be
        honoured for a fool, or knighted for a coward.
          COUN. W. There’s too many of them already.
          FATH. ’Twere sin then to raise the number.
          COUN. W. Well, we’ll try both our likings for a month,
        and then either proceed or let fall the suit.
          FATH. Be it as you have spoke, but ’tis my hope A longer
        term.
          COUN. W. No, truly; our term ends once a-month: we
        should get more than the lawyers, for they have but four
        terms a-year, and we have twelve, and that makes ’em run
        so fast to us in the vacation.
          FATH. A mistress of a choice beauty! Amongst such
        imperfect creatures I ha’ not seen a perfecter. I
        should have reckoned the fortunes of my daughter
        amongst the happiest, had she lighted into such a
        service; whereas now I rest doubtful whom or where she
        serves.                                        [_Aside._
          COUN. W. There’s for your bodily advice, tailor; and
        there’s for your head-counsel [_giving money to the
        Tailor and to_ MISTRESS COMINGS]; and I discharge you
        both till to-morrow morning again.
          TAI. At which time our neatest attendance.
          MIS. C. I pray, have an especial care, howsoever you
        stand or lie, that nothing fall upon your hair to batter
        your wire.
          COUN. W. I warrant you for that. [_Exit_ MIS. C. _with
        Tailor_.]—Which gown becomes me best now, the purple
        satin or this?
          HELL. If my opinion might rule over you——

                _Enter_ LETHE, REARAGE, _and_ SALEWOOD.

          LET. Come, gallants, I’ll bring you to a beauty shall
        strike your eyes into your hearts: what you see, you
        shall desire, yet never enjoy.
          REAR. And that’s a villanous torment.
          SALE. And is she but your underput, master Lethe?
          LET. No more, of my credit; and a gentlewoman of a great
        house, noble parentage, unmatchable education, my plain
        pung. I may grace her with the name of a courtesan, a
        backslider, a prostitution, or such a toy;[1050] but
        when all comes to all, ’tis but a plain pung. Look you,
        gentlemen, that’s she; behold her!
          COUN. W. O my beloved strayer! I consume in thy absence.
          LET. La, you now! You shall not say I’ll be proud to
        you, gentlemen; I give you leave to salute her.—I’m
        afraid of nothing now, but that she’ll utterly disgrace
        ’em, turn tail to ’em, and place their kisses behind
        her. No, by my faith, she deceives me; by my troth,
        sh’as kissed ’em both with her lips. I thank you for
        that music, masters. ’Slid, they both court her at once;
        and see, if she ha’ not the wit to stand still and let
        ’em! I think if two men were brewed into one, there is
        that woman would drink ’em up both.            [_Aside._
          REAR. A coxcomb! he a courtier?
          COUN. W. He says he has a place there.
          SALE. So has the fool, a better place than he, and can
        come where he dare not shew his head.
          LET. Nay, hear you me, gentlemen——
          SALE. I protest you were the last man we spoke on: we’re
        a little busy yet; pray, stay there awhile; we’ll come
        to you presently.
          LET. This is good, i’faith: endure this, and be a slave
        for ever! Since you neither savour of good breeding nor
        bringing up, I’ll slice your hamstrings, but I’ll make
        you shew mannerly. [_Aside._]—Pox on you, leave
        courting: I ha’ not the heart to hurt an Englishman,
        i’faith, or else——
          SALE. What else?
          LET. Prithee, let’s be merry; nothing else.—Here, fetch
        some wine.
          COUN. W. Let my servant go for’t.
          LET. Yours? which is he?
          FATH.[1051] This, sir.—But I scarce like my mistress
        now: the loins can ne’er be safe where the flies be so
        busy.
        Wit, by experience bought, foils wit at school:
        Who proves a deeper knave than a spent fool?   [_Aside._
        I am gone for your worship’s wine, sir.         [_Exit._
          HELL. Sir, you put up too much indignity; bring company
        to cut your own throat. The fire is not yet so hot, that
        you need two screens before it; ’tis but new kindled
        yet: if ’twere risse[1052] to a flame, I could not blame
        you then to put others before you; but, alas, all the
        heat yet is comfortable; a cherisher, not a defacer!
          LET. Prithee, let ’em alone; they’ll be ashamed on’t
        anon, I trow, if they have any grace in ’em.
          HELL. I’d fain have him quarrel, fight, and be assuredly
        killed, that I might beg his place, for there’s ne’er a
        one void yet.                                 [_Aside._

                     _Enter_ SHORTYARD _and_ EASY.

          COUN. W. You’ll make him mad anon.
          SALE. ’Tis to that end.
          SHO. Yet at last master Quomodo is as firm as his
        promise.
          EASY. Did I not tell you still he would?
          SHO. Let me see; I am seven hundred pound in bond now to
        the rascal.
          EASY. Nay, you’re no less, master Blastfield; look to’t.
        By my troth, I must needs confess, sir, you ha’ been
        uncommonly kind to me since I ha’ been in town: but
        master Alsup shall know on’t.
          SHO. That’s my ambition, sir.
          EASY. I beseech you, sir,—
        Stay, this is Lethe’s haunt; see, we have catch’d him.
          LET. Master Blastfield and master Easy? you’re kind
        gentlemen both.
          SHO. Is that the beauty you famed so?
          LET. The same.
          SHO. Who be those so industrious about her?
          LET. Rearage and Salewood: I’ll tell you the
        unmannerliest trick of ’em that ever you heard in your
        life.
          SHO. Prithee, what’s that?
          LET. I invited ’em hither to look upon her; brought ’em
        along with me; gave ’em leave to salute her in kindness:
        what do they but most saucily fall in love with her,
        very impudently court her for themselves, and, like two
        crafty attorneys, finding a hole in my lease, go about
        to defeat me of my right?
          SHO. Ha’ they so little conscience?
          LET. The most uncivilest part that you have seen! I know
        they’ll be sorry for’t when they have done; for there’s
        no man but gives a sigh after his sin of women; I know
        it by myself.
          SHO. You parcel of a rude, saucy, and unmannerly
        nation——
          LET. One good thing in him, he’ll tell ’em on’t roundly.
                                                       [_Aside._
          SHO. Cannot a gentleman purchase a little fire to thaw
        his appetite by, but must you, that have been daily
        singed in the flame, be as greedy to beguile him on’t?
        How can it appear in you but maliciously, and that you
        go about to engross hell to yourselves? heaven forbid
        that you should not suffer a stranger to come in! the
        devil himself is not so unmannerly. I do not think but
        some of them rather will be wise enough to beg offices
        there before you, and keep you out; marry, all the spite
        will be, they cannot sell ’em again.
          EASY. Come, are you not to blame? not to give place,—
        To us, I mean.
          LET. A worse and[1053] worse disgrace!
          COUN. W. Nay, gentlemen, you wrong us both then: stand
        from me; I protest I’ll draw my silver bodkin upon you.
          SHO. Clubs, clubs![1054]—Gentlemen, stand upon your
        guard.
          COUN. W. A gentlewoman must swagger a little now and
        then, I perceive; there would be no civility in her
        chamber else. Though it be my hard fortune to have my
        keeper there a coward, the thing that’s kept is a
        gentlewoman born.
          SHO. And, to conclude, a coward, infallible of your
        side: why do you think, i’faith, I took you to be a
        coward? do I think you’ll turn your back to any man
        living? you’ll be whipt first.
          EASY. And then indeed she turns her back to some man
        living.
          SHO. But that man shews himself a knave, for he dares
        not shew his own face when he does it; for some of the
        common council in Henry the Eighth’s days thought it
        modesty at that time that one vizzard should look upon
        another.
          EASY. ’Twas honestly considered of ’em, i’faith.

                         _Enter_ MOTHER GRUEL.

          SHO. How now? what piece of stuff comes here?
          LET. Now, some good news yet to recover my repute, and
        grace me in this company. [_Aside._]—Gentlemen, are we
        friends among ourselves?
          SHO. United.

                      _Re-enter Father with wine._

          LET. Then here comes Rhenish to confirm our
        amity.—Wagtail, salute them all; they are friends.
          COUN. W. Then, saving my quarrel, to you all.
          SHO. To’s all.                         [_They drink._
          COUN. W. Now beshrew your hearts, and[1055] you do not.
          SHO. To sweet master Lethe.
          LET. Let it flow this way, dear master
        Blastfield.—Gentlemen, to you all.
          SHO. This Rhenish wine is like the scouring stick to a
        gun, it makes the barrel clear; it has an excellent
        virtue, it keeps all the sinks in man and woman’s body
        sweet in June and July; and, to say truth, if ditches
        were not cast once a-year, and drabs once a-month, there
        would be no abiding i’ th’ city.
          LET. Gentlemen, I’ll make you privy to a letter I sent.
          SHO. A letter comes well after privy; it makes amends.
          LET. There’s one Quomodo a draper’s daughter in town,
        whom for her happy portion I wealthily affect.
          REAR. And not for love?—This makes for me his rival:
        Bear witness.                           [_To_ SALEWOOD.
          LET. The father does elect me for the man,
        The daughter says the same.
          SHO. Are you not well?
          LET. Yes, all but for the mother; she’s my sickness.
          SHO. Byrlady,[1056] and the mother[1057] is a pestilent,
        wilful, troublesome sickness, I can tell you, if she
        light upon you handsomely.
          LET. I find it so: she for a stranger pleads,
        Whose name I ha’ not learn’d.
          REAR. And e’en now he called me by it.      [_Aside._
          LET. Now, as my letter told her, since only her consent
        kept aloof off,[1058] what might I think on’t but that
        she merely[1059] doted upon me herself?
          SHO. Very assuredly.
          SALE. This makes still for you.
          SHO. Did you let it go so, i’faith?
          LET. You may believe it, sir.—Now, what says her answer?
          SHO. Ay, her answer.
          MOTH. G. She says you’re a base, proud knave, and[1060]
        like your worship.
          LET. How!
          SHO. Nay, hear out her answer, or there’s no goodness in
        you.
          MOTH. G. You ha’ forgot, she says, in what pickle your
        worship came up, and brought two of your friends to give
        their words for a suit of green kersey.
          LET. Drudge, peace, or——
          SHO. Shew yourself a gentleman: she had the patience to
        read your letter, which was as bad as this can be: what
        will she think on’t? not hear her answer!—Speak, good
        his drudge.
          MOTH. G. And as for her daughter, she hopes she’ll be
        ruled by her in time, and not be carried away with a
        cast of manchets,[1061] a bottle of wine, and a custard;
        which once made her daughter sick, because you came by
        it with a bad conscience.
          LET. Gentlemen, I’m all in a sweat.
          SHO. That’s very wholesome for your body: nay, you must
        keep in your arms.
          MOTH. G. Then she demanded of me whether I was your
        worship’s aunt[1062] or no?
          LET. Out, out, out!
          MOTH. G. Alas, said I, I am a poor drudge of his! Faith,
        and[1063] thou wert his mother, quoth she, he’d make
        thee his drudge, I warrant him. Marry, out upon him,
        quoth I, an’t like your worship.
          LET. Horror, horror! I’m smothered: let me go; torment
        me not.                                        [_Exit._
          SHO. And[1064] you love me, let’s follow him, gentlemen.
          REAR. _and_ SALE. Agreed.                  [_Exeunt._
          SHO. I count a hundred pound well spent to pursue a good
        jest, master Easy.
          EASY. By my troth, I begin to bear that mind too.
          SHO. Well said, i’faith: hang money! good jests are
        worth silver at all times.
          EASY. They’re worth gold, master Blastfield.
              [_Exeunt all except Country Wench and her Father._
          COUN. W. Do you deceive me so? Are you toward marriage,
        i’faith, master Lethe? it shall go hard but I’ll forbid
        the banes:[1065] I’ll send a messenger into your bones,
        another into your purse, but I’ll do’t.         [_Exit._
          FA. Thou fair and wicked creature, steept in art!
        Beauteous and fresh, the soul the foulest part.
        A common filth is like a house possest,
        Where, if not spoil’d, you’ll come out ’fraid at least.
        This service likes[1066] not me: though I rest poor,
        I hate the basest use to screen a whore.
        The human stroke ne’er made him; he that can
        Be bawd to woman never leapt from man;
        Some monster won his mother.
        I wish’d my poor child hither; doubled wrong!
        A month and such a mistress were too long.
        Yet here awhile in others’ lives I’ll see
        How former follies did appear in me.           [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                        _Enter_ EASY _and Boy_.

          EASY. Boy.
          BOY. Anon, sir.
          EASY. Where left you master Blastfield, your master, say
        you?
          BOY. An hour since I left him in Paul’s,[1067] sir:—but
        you’ll not find him the same man again next time you
        meet him.                   [_Aside._
          EASY. Methinks I have no being without his company; ’tis
        so full of kindness and delight: I hold him to be the
        only companion in earth.
          BOY. Ay, as companions go now-a-days, that help to spend
        a man’s money.                                [_Aside._
          EASY. So full of nimble wit, various discourse, pregnant
        apprehension, and uncommon entertainment! he might keep
        company with any lord for his grace.
          BOY. Ay, with any lord that were past it.   [_Aside._
          EASY. And such a good, free-hearted, honest, affable
        kind of gentleman.—Come, boy, a heaviness will possess
        me till I see him.                             [_Exit._
          BOY. But you’ll find yourself heavier then, by a seven
        hundred pound weight. Alas, poor birds that cannot keep
        the sweet country, where they fly at pleasure, but must
        needs come to London to have their wings clipt, and are
        fain to go hopping home again!                 [_Exit._


                               SCENE III.


                      _A Street near St. Paul’s._

           _Enter_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT _disguised as a
                        Sergeant and a Yeoman_.

          SHO. So, no man is so impudent to deny that:
        spirits[1068] can change their shapes, and soonest of
        all into sergeants, because they are cousin-germans to
        spirits; for there’s but two kind of arrests till
        doomsday,—the devil for the soul, the sergeant for the
        body; but afterward the devil arrests body and soul,
        sergeant and all, if they be knaves still and deserve
        it. Now, my yeoman Falselight.
          FAL. I attend you, good sergeant Shortyard.
          SNO. No more master Blastfield now. Poor Easy, hardly
        beset!
          FAL. But how if he should go to prison? we’re in a mad
        state then, being not sergeants.
          SHO. Never let it come near thy belief that he’ll take
        prison, or stand out in law, knowing the debt to be due,
        but still expect the presence of master Blastfield, kind
        master Blastfield, worshipful master Blastfield; and at
        the last——
          BOY. [_within_]. Master Shortyard, master Falselight!
          SHO. The boy? a warning-piece.[1069] See where he comes.

                        _Enter_ EASY _and Boy_.

          EASY. Is not in Paul’s.
          BOY. He is not far off sure, sir.
          EASY. When was his hour, sayst thou?
          BOY. Two, sir.
          EASY. Why, two has struck.
          BOY. No, sir, they are now a-striking.
          SHO. Master Richard Easy of Essex, we arrest you.
          EASY. Hah?
          BOY. Alas, a surgeon! he’s hurt i’ th’ shoulder.
                      [_Exit._
          SHO. Deliver your weapons quietly, sir.
          EASY. Why, what’s the matter?
          SHO. You’re arrested at the suit of master Quomodo.
          EASY. Master Quomodo?
          SHO. How strange you make it! You’re a landed gentleman,
        sir, I know;[1070] ’tis but a trifle, a bond of seven
        hundred pound.
          EASY. La, I knew[1071] you had mistook; you should
             arrest
        One master Blastfield; ’tis his bond, his debt.
          SHO. Is not your name there?
          EASY. True, for fashion’s sake.
          SHO. Why, and ’tis for fashion’s sake that we arrest
        you.
          EASY. Nay, and[1072] it be no more, I yield to that: I
        know master Blastfield will see me take no injury as
        long as I’m in town, for master Alsup’s sake.
          SHO. Who’s that, sir?
          EASY. An honest gentleman in Essex.
          SHO. O, in Essex? I thought you had been in London,
        where now your business lies: honesty from Essex will be
        a great while a-coming, sir; you should look out an
        honest pair of citizens.
          EASY. Alas, sir, I know not where to find ’em!
          SHO. No? there’s enow in town.
          EASY. I know not one, by my troth; I am a mere stranger
        for these parts: master Quomodo is all, and the
        honestest that I know.
          SHO. To him then let’s set forward.—Yeoman Spiderman,
        cast an eye about for master Blastfield.
          EASY. Boy.—Alas, the poor boy was frighted away at
        first!
          SHO. Can you blame him, sir? we that daily fray away
        knights, may fright away boys, I hope.        [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE IV.


                           QUOMODO’s _Shop_.

         _Enter_ QUOMODO _and Boy_; THOMASINE _watching above_.

          QUO. Ha! have they him, sayst thou?
          BOY. As sure as——
          QUO. The land’s mine: that’s sure enough, boy.
        Let me advance thee, knave, and give thee a kiss:
        My plot’s so firm, I dare it now to miss.
        Now shall I be divulg’d a landed man
        Throughout the livery: one points, another whispers,
        A third frets inwardly; let him fret and hang!
        Especially his envy I shall have
        That would be fain, yet cannot be a knave;
        Like an old lecher[1073] girt in a[1074] furr’d gown,
        Whose mind stands stiff, but his performance down.
         Now come my golden days in. Whither is the worshipful
        master Quomodo and his fair bedfellow rid forth? To his
        land in Essex. Whence come[1075] those goodly load[s] of
        logs? From his land in Essex. Where grows this pleasant
        fruit, says one citizen’s wife in the row? At master
        Quomodo’s orchard in Essex. O, O, does it so? I thank
        you for that good news, i’faith.
          BOY. Here they come with him, sir.           [_Exit._
          QUO. Grant me patience in my joys, that being so great,
        I run not mad with ’em!

        _Enter_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT _disguised as before,
                           bringing in_ EASY.

          SHO. Bless master Quomodo!
          QUO. How now, sergeants? who ha’ you brought me
        here?—Master Easy!
          EASY. Why, la you now, sergeants; did I not tell you you
        mistook?
          QUO. Did you not hear me say, I had rather ha’ had
        master Blastfield, the more sufficient man a great deal?
          SHO. Very true, sir; but this gentleman lighting into
        our hands first——
          QUO. Why did you so, sir?
          SHO. We thought good to make use of that opportunity,
        and hold him fast.
          QUO. You did well in that, I must needs say, for your
        own securities: but ’twas not my mind, master Easy, to
        have you first; you must needs think so.
          EASY. I dare swear that, master Quomodo.
          QUO. But since you are come to me, I have no reason to
        refuse you; I should shew little manners in that, sir.
          EASY. But I hope you spake not in that sense, sir, to
        impose the bond upon me?
          QUO. By my troth, that’s my meaning, sir; you shall find
        me an honest man; you see I mean what I say. Is not the
        day past, the money untendered? you’d ha’ me live
        uprightly, master Easy?
          EASY. Why, sir, you know master Blastfield is the man.
          QUO. Why, sir, I know master Blastfield is the man; but
        is he any more than one man? Two entered into bond to
        me, or I’m foully cozened.
          EASY. You know my entrance was but for fashion sake.
          QUO. Why, I’ll agree to you: you’ll grant ’tis the
        fashion likewise, when the bond’s due, to have the money
        paid again.
          SHO. So we told him, sir, and that it lay in your
        worship’s courtesy to arrest which you please.
          QUO. Marry, does it, sir—these fellows know the
        law—beside, you offered yourself into bond to me,
        you know, when I had no stomach to you: now beshrew
        your heart for your labour! I might ha’ had a good
        substantial citizen, that would ha’ paid the sum
        roundly, although I think you sufficient enough for
        seven hundred pound: beside the forfeiture, I would
        be loath to disgrace you so much before sergeants.
          EASY. If you would ha’ the patience, sir, I do not think
        but master Blastfield is at carrier’s receive the money.
          QUO. He will prove the honester man then, and you the
        better discharged. I wonder he should break with me;
        ’twas never his practice. You must not be angry with me
        now, though you were somewhat hot when you entered into
        bond; you may easily go in angrily, but you cannot come
        out so.
          EASY. No, the devil’s in’t for that!
          SHO. Do you hear, sir? a’ my troth, we pity you: ha’ you
        any store of crowns about you?
          EASY. Faith, a poor store; yet they shall be at their
        service that will strive to do me good.—We were both
        drunk last night, and ne’er thought upon the bond.
                  [_Aside._
          SHO. I must tell you this, you have fell into the hands
        of a most merciless devourer, the very gull a’ the city:
        should you offer him money, goods, or lands now, he’d
        rather have your body in prison, he’s a’ such a nature.
          EASY. Prison? we’re undone then!
          SHO. He’s a’ such a nature, look; let him owe any man a
        spite, what’s his course? he will lend him money to-day,
        a’ purpose to ’rest him to-morrow.
          EASY. Defend me!
          SHO. Has at least sixteen at this instant proceeded in
        both the counters;[1077] some bachelors,[1078] some
        masters, some doctors of captivity of twenty years’
        standing; and he desires nothing more than imprisonment.
          EASY. Would master Blastfield would come away!
          SHO. Ay, then things would not be as they are. What will
        you say to us, if we procure you two substantial subsidy
        citizens to bail you, spite on’s heart, and set you at
        liberty to find out master Blastfield?
          EASY. Sergeant, here, take all; I’ll be dear to you, do
        but perform it.
          SHO. Much![1079]
          FAL.[1080] Enough, sweet sergeant; I hope I understand
        thee.
          SHO. I love to prevent the malice of such a rascal;
        perhaps you might find master Blastfield to-night.
          EASY. Why, we lie together, man; there’s the jest on’t.
          SHO. Fie: and you’ll seek to secure your bail, because
        they will be two citizens of good account, you must do
        that for your credit sake.
          EASY. I’ll be bound to save them harmless.
          SHO. A pox on him, you cut his throat then: no words.
          EASY. What’s it you require me, master Quomodo?
          QUO. You know that before this time, I hope, sir;
        present money, or present imprisonment.
          SHO. I told you so.
          EASY. We ne’er had money of you.
          QUO. You had commodities, an’t please you.
          EASY. Well, may I not crave so much liberty upon my
        word, to seek out master Blastfield?
          QUO. Yes, and[1081] you would not laugh at me: we are
        sometimes gulls to gentlemen, I thank ’em; but gentlemen
        are never gulls to us, I commend ’em.
          SHO. Under your leave, master Quomodo, the gentleman
        craves the furtherance of an hour; and it sorts well
        with our occasion at this time, having a little urgent
        business at Guildhall; at which minute we’ll return, and
        see what agreement is made.
          QUO. Nay, take him along with you, sergeant.
          EASY. I’m undone then!
          SHO. He’s your prisoner; and being safe in your house at
        your own disposing, you cannot deny him such a request:
        beside, he hath a little faith in master Blastfield’s
        coming, sir.
          QUO. Let me not be too long delayed, I charge you.
          EASY.[1082] Not an hour, i’faith, sir.

                           [_Exeunt_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT.
          QUO. O master Easy, of all men living I never dreamed
        you would ha’ done me this injury! make me wound my
        credit, fail in my commodities, bring[1083] my state
        into suspicion! for the breaking of your day to me has
        broken my day to others.
          EASY. You tell me of that still which is no fault of
        mine, master Quomodo.
          QUO. O, what’s a man but his honesty, master Easy? and
        that’s a fault amongst most of us all. Mark but this
        note; I’ll give you good counsel now. As often as you
        give your name to a bond, you must think you christen a
        child, and take the charge on’t, too; for as the one,
        the bigger it grows, the more cost it requires, so the
        other, the longer it lies, the more charges it puts you
        to. Only here’s the difference; a child must be broke,
        and a bond must not; the more you break children, the
        more you keep ’emunder; but the more you break bonds,
        the more they’ll leap in your face; and therefore, to
        conclude, I would never undertake to be gossip[1084] to
        that bond which I would not see well brought up.
          EASY. Say you so, sir? I’ll think upon your counsel
        hereafter for’t.
          QUO. Ah fool, thou shouldest ne’er ha’ tasted such wit,
        but that I know ’tis too late!                 [_Aside._
          THO. The more I grieve.                      [_Aside._
          QUO. To put all this into the compass of a little hoop-
        ring,—

        Make this account, come better days or worse,
        So many bonds abroad, so many boys at nurse.
          EASY. A good medicine for a short memory: but since you
        have entered so far, whose children are desperate debts,
        I pray?
          QUO. Faith, they are like the offsprings of stolen lust,
        put to the hospital: their fathers are not to be found;
        they are either too far abroad, or too close within: and
        thus for your memory’s sake,—

        The desperate debtor hence derives his name,
        One that has neither money, land, nor fame;
        All that he makes prove bastards, and not bands:[1085]
        But such as yours at first are born to lands.
          EASY. But all that I beget hereafter I’ll soon
        disinherit, master Quomodo.
          QUO. In the meantime, here’s a shrewd knave will
        disinherit you.           [_Aside._
          EASY. Well, to put you out of all doubt, master Quomodo,
        I’ll not trust to your courtesy; I ha’ sent for bail.
          QUO. How? you’ve cozened me there, i’faith!
          EASY. Since the worst comes to the worst, I have those
        friends i’ th’ city, I hope, that will not suffer me to
        lie for seven hundred pound.
          QUO. And you told me you had no friends here at all: how
        should a man trust you now?
          EASY. That was but to try your courtesy, master Quomodo.
          QUO. How unconscionably he gulls himself!
        [_Aside._]—They must be wealthy subsidy-men, sir, at
        least forty pound i’ th’ king’s books, I can tell you,
        that do such a feat for you.

          _Re-enter_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT, _disguised as
                   wealthy citizens in satin suits_.
          EASY. Here they come, whatsoe’er they are.
          QUO. Byrlady,[1086] alderman’s deputies!—I am very sorry
        for you, sir; I cannot refuse such men.
          SHO. Are you the gentleman in distress?
          EASY. None more than myself, sir.
          QUO. He speaks truer than he thinks; for if he knew the
        hearts that owe[1087] those faces! A dark shop’s good
        for somewhat.[1088]                            [_Aside._
          EASY. That was all, sir.
          SHO. And that’s enough; for by that means you have made
        yourself liable to the bond, as well as that Basefield.
          EASY. Blastfield, sir.
          SHO. O, cry you mercy; ’tis Blastfield indeed.
          EASY. But, under both your worships’ favours, I know
        where to find him presently.
          SHO. That’s all your refuge.

                            _Re-enter Boy._

          BOY. News, good news, master Easy!
          EASY. What, boy?
          BOY. Master Blastfield, my master, has received a
        thousand pound, and will be at his lodging at supper.
          EASY. Happy news! Hear you that, master Quomodo?
          QUO. ’Tis enough for you to hear that; you’re the
        fortunate man, sir.
          EASY. Not now, I beseech your good worships.
          SHO. Gentleman, what’s your t’other name?
          EASY. Easy.
          SHO. O, master Easy. I would we could rather pleasure
        you otherwise, master Easy; you should soon perceive it.
        I’ll speak a proud word: we have pitied more gentlemen
        in distress than any two citizens within the freedom;
        but to be bail to seven hundred pound action is a matter
        of shrewd weight.
          EASY. I’ll be bound to secure you.
          SHO. Tut, what’s your bond, sir?
          EASY. Body, goods, and lands, immediately before master
        Quomodo.
          SHO. Shall we venture once again, that have been so
        often undone by gentlemen?
          FAL. I have no great stomach to’t; it will appear in us
        more pity than wisdom.
          EASY. Why should you say so, sir?
          SHO. I like the gentleman’s face well; he does not look
        as if he would deceive us.
          EASY. O, not I, sir!
          SHO. Come, we’ll make a desperate voyage once again;
        we’ll try his honesty, and take his single bond, of
        body, goods, and lands.
          EASY. I dearly thank you, sir.
          SHO. Master Quomodo——
          QUO. Your worships.
          SHO. We have took a course to set your prisoner free.
          QUO. Your worships are good bail; you content me.
          SHO. Come, then, and be a witness to a
        recullisance.[1089]
          QUO. With all my heart, sir.
          SHO. Master Easy, you must have an especial care now to
        find out that Blastfield.
          EASY. I shall have him at my lodging, sir.
          SHO. The suit will be followed against you else; master
        Quomodo will come upon us, and forsake you.
          EASY. I know that, sir.
          SHO. Well, since I see you have such a good mind to be
        honest, I’ll leave some greater affairs, and sweat with
        you to find him myself.
            EASY. Here then my misery ends:
        A stranger’s kindness oft exceeds a friend’s. [_Exeunt._
          THO. Thou art deceiv’d; thy misery but begins:
        To beguile goodness is the core of sins.
        My love is such unto thee, that I die
        As often as thou drink’st up injury;
        Yet have no means to warn thee from’t, for he
        That sows in craft does reap in jealousy.

                                                  [_Exit above._


                                SCENE V.


                              _A Street._

                    _Enter_ REARAGE _and_ SALEWOOD.

          REAR. Now the letter’s made up and all; it wants but
        the print of a seal, and away it goes to master Quomodo.
        Andrew Lethe is well whipt in’t; his name stands in a
        white sheet here, and does penance for him.
          SALE. You have shame enough against him, if that be
        good.
          REAR. First, as a contempt of that reverend ceremony he
        has in hand, to wit, marriage.
          SALE. Why do you say, to wit, marriage, when you know
        there’s none will marry that’s wise?
          REAR. Had it not more need then to have wit to put to’t,
        if it be grown to a folly?
          SALE. You’ve won; I’ll give’t you.
          REAR. ’Tis no thanks now: but, as I was saying, as
        a foul contempt to that sacred ceremony, he most
        audaciously keeps a drab in town, and, to be free
        from the interruption of blue beadles[1090] and
        other bawdy officers, he most politicly lodges her
        in a constable’s house.
          SALE. That’s a pretty point, i’faith.
          REAR. And so the watch, that should fetch her out, are
        her chiefest guard to keep her in.
          SALE. It must needs be; for look, how the constable
        plays his conscience, the watchmen will follow the suit.
          REAR. Why, well then.

              _Enter_ EASY, _and_ SHORTYARD _disguised as
                             before_.[1091]

          EASY. All night from me? he’s hurt, he’s made away!
          SHO. Where shall we seek him now? you lead me fair
        jaunts, sir.
          EASY. Pray, keep a little patience, sir; I shall find
        him at last, you shall see.
          SHO. A citizen of my ease and substance to walk so long
        a-foot!
          EASY. You should ha’ had my horse, but that he has eaten
        out his head, sir.
          SHO. How? would you had me hold him by the tail, sir,
        then?
          EASY. Manners forbid! ’tis no part of my meaning, sir.
        O, here’s master Rearage and master Salewood: now we
        shall hear of him presently.—Gentlemen both.
          SALE. Master Easy? how fare you, sir?
          EASY. Very well in health. Did you see master Blastfield
        this morning?
          SALE. I was about to move it to you.
          REAR. We were all three in a mind then.
          SALE. I ha’ not set eye on him these two days.
          REAR. I wonder he keeps so long from us, i’faith.
          EASY. I begin to be sick.
          SALE. Why, what’s the matter?
          EASY. Nothing in troth, but a great desire I had to have
        seen him.
          REAR. I wonder you should miss on’t lately; you’re his
        bedfellow.[1092]
          EASY. I lay alone to-night, i’faith, I do not know how.
        O, here comes master Lethe; he can despatch me.—

                             _Enter_ LETHE.

        Master Lethe.
          LET. What’s your name, sir? O, cry you mercy, master
        Easy.
          EASY. When parted you from master Blastfield, sir?
          LET. Blastfield’s an ass: I have sought him these two
        days to beat him.
          EASY. Yourself all alone, sir?
          LET. Ay, and three more.                      [_Exit._
          SHO. I am glad I am where I am, then; I perceive ’twas
        time of all hands.                             [_Aside._
          REAR. Content, i’faith; let’s trace him.
                                          [_Exit with_ SALEWOOD.
          SHO. What, have you found him yet? neither? what’s to be
        done now? I’ll venture my body no further for any
        gentleman’s pleasure: I know not how soon I may be
        called upon, and now to overheat myself——
          EASY. I’m undone!
          SHO. This is you that slept with him! you can make fools
        of us; but I’ll turn you over to Quomodo for’t.
          EASY. Good sir——
          SHO. I’ll prevent mine own danger.
          EASY. I beseech you, sir——
          SHO. Though I love gentlemen well, I do not mean to be
        undone for ’em.
          EASY. Pray, sir, let me request you, sir; sweet sir, I
        beseech you, sir——                            [_Exeunt._




                            ACT IV. SCENE I.


                           QUOMODO’s _Shop_.

         _Enter_ QUOMODO, SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT _disguised
           as before,[1093] after whom_ EASY _follows hard_.

          SHO. Made fools of us! not to be found!
          QUO. What, what?
          EASY. Do not undo me quite, though, master Quomodo.
          QUO. You’re very welcome, master Easy: I ha’ nothing to
        say to you; I’ll not touch you; you may go when you
        please; I have good bail here, I thank their worships.
          EASY. What shall I say, or whom shall I beseech?
          SHO. Gentlemen! ’slid, they were born to undo us, I
        think: but, for my part, I’ll make an oath before master
        Quomodo here, ne’er to do gentlemen good while I live.
          FAL. I’ll not be long behind you.
          SHO. Away! if you had any grace in you, you would be
        ashamed to look us i’ th’ face, i-wis:[1094] I wonder
        with what brow you can come amongst us. I should seek my
        fortunes far enough, if I were you; and neither return
        to Essex, to be a shame to my predecessors, nor remain
        about London, to be a mock to my successors.
          QUO. Subtle Shortyard!                       [_Aside._
          SHO. Here are his lands forfeited to us, master Quomodo;
        and to avoid the inconscionable trouble of law, all the
        assurance he made to us we willingly resign to you.
          QUO. What shall I do with rubbish? give me money: ’tis
        for your worships to have land, that keep great houses;
        I should be hoisted.
          SHO. But, master Quomodo, if you would but conceive it
        aright, the land would fall fitter to you than to us.
          EASY. Curtsying about my land!               [_Aside._
          SHO. You have a towardly son and heir, as we hear.
          QUO. I must needs say, he is a Templar indeed.
          SHO. We have neither posterity in town, nor hope for any
        abroad: we have wives, but the marks have been out of
        their mouths these twenty years; and, as it appears,
        they did little good when they were in. We could not
        stand about it, sir; to get riches and children too,
        ’tis more than one man can do: and I am of those
        citizens’ minds that say, let our wives make shift for
        children and[1095] they will, they get none of us; and I
        cannot think, but he that has both much wealth and many
        children has had more helps coming in than himself.
          QUO. I am not a bow wide[1096] of your mind, sir: and
        for the thrifty and covetous hopes I have in my son and
        heir, Sim Quomodo, that he will never trust his land in
        wax and parchment, as many gentlemen have done before
        him——
          EASY. A by-blow for me.                      [_Aside._

                           _Enter_ THOMASINE.

          QUO. I will honestly discharge you, and receive it in
        due form and order of law, to strengthen it for ever to
        my son and heir, that he may undoubtedly enter upon’t
        without the let[1097] or molestation of any man, at his
        or our pleasure whensoever.
          SHO. ’Tis so assured unto you.
          QUO. Why, then, master Easy, you’re a free man, sir; you
        may deal in what you please, and go whither you
        will.—Why, Thomasine, master Easy is come from Essex;
        bid him welcome in a cup of small beer.
          THO. Not only vild,[1098] but in it tyrannous.
                                                       [_Aside._
          QUO. If it please you, sir, you know the house; you may
        visit us often, and dine with us once a-quarter.
          EASY. Confusion light on you, your wealth, and heir!
        Worm gnaw your conscience as the moth your ware!
        I am not the first heir that robb’d or begg’d.
                                                        [_Exit._
          QUO. Excellent, excellent, sweet spirits![1099]
                                              [_Exit_ THOMASINE.
          SHO. Landed master Quomodo!
          QUO. Delicate Shortyard, commodious Falselight,
        Hug and away, shift, shift:
        ’Tis slight,[1100] not strength, that gives the greatest
           lift.           [_Exeunt_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT.
        Now my desires are full,—for this time.
        Men may have cormorant wishes, but, alas,
        A little thing, three hundred pound a-year,
        Suffices nature, keeps life and soul together!
        I’ll have ’emlopt[1101] immediately; I long
        To warm myself by th’ wood.
         A fine journey in the Whitsun holydays, i’faith, to
        ride down with a number of citizens and their wives,
        some upon pillions, some upon side-saddles, I and
        little Thomasine i’ th’ middle, our son and heir, Sim
        Quomodo, in a peach-colour taffeta jacket, some horse-
        length, or a long yard before us;—there will be a fine
        show on’s, I can tell you;—where we citizens will
        laugh and lie down,[1102] get all our wives with child
        against a bank, and get up again. Stay; hah! hast thou
        that wit, i’faith? ’twill be admirable: to see how the
        very thought of green fields puts a man into sweet
        inventions! I will presently possess Sim Quomodo of
        all the land; I have a toy[1103] and I’ll do’t: and
        because I see before mine eyes that most of our heirs
        prove notorious rioters after our deaths, and that
        cozenage in the father wheels about to folly in the
        son, our posterity commonly foiled at the same weapon
        at which we played rarely; and being the world’s
        beaten[1104] word,—what’s got over the devil’s back
        (that’s by knavery) must be spent under his belly
        (that’s by lechery): being awake in these knowings,
        why should not I oppose ’emnow, and break Destiny of
        her custom, preventing that by policy, which without
        it must needs be destiny? And I have took the course:
        I will forthwith sicken, call for my keys, make my
        will, and dispose of all; give my son this blessing,
        that he trust no man, keep his hand from a quean and a
        scrivener, live in his father’s faith, and do good to
        nobody: then will I begin to rave like a fellow of a
        wide conscience, and, for all the world, counterfeit
        to the life that which I know I shall do when I die;
        take on[1105] for my gold, my lands, and my writings,
        grow worse and worse, call upon the devil, and so make
        an end. By this time I have indented with a couple of
        searchers,[1106] who, to uphold my device, shall fray
        them out a’ th’ chamber with report of sickness; and
        so, la, I start up, and recover again! for in this
        business I will trust, no, not my spirits,[1107]
        Falselight and Shortyard, but, in disguise, note the
        condition of all; how pitiful my wife takes my death,
        which will appear by November in her eye, and the fall
        of the leaf in her body, but especially by the cost
        she bestows upon my funeral, there shall I try her
        love and regard; my daughter’s marrying to my will and
        liking; and my son’s affection after my disposing:
        for, to conclude, I am as jealous of this land as of
        my wife, to know what would become of it after my
        decease.                                        [_Exit._


                               SCENE II.


                     _The Country Wench’s Lodging._

                   _Enter Country Wench and Father._

          FA. Though I be poor, ’tis my glory to live honest.
          COUN. W. I prithee, do not leave me.
          FA. To be bawd!
        Hell has not such an office.
        I thought at first your mind had been preserv’d
        In virtue and in modesty of blood;
        That such a face had not been made to please
        Th’ unsettled appetites of several men;
        Those eyes turn’d up through prayer, not through lust:
        But you are wicked, and my thoughts unjust.
          COUN. W. Why, thou art an unreasonable fellow, i’faith.
        Do not all trades live by their ware, and yet called
        honest livers? do they not thrive best when they utter
        most, and make it away by the great?[1108] is not whole-
        sale the chiefest merchandise? do you think some
        merchants could keep their wives so brave[1109] but for
        their whole-sale? you’re foully deceived and[1110] you
        think so.
          FA. You are so glu’d to punishment and shame.
        Your words e’en deserve whipping.
        To bear the habit of a gentlewoman,
        And be in mind so distant!
          COUN. W. Why, you fool you, are not gentlewomen sinners?
        and there’s no courageous sinner amongst us but was a
        gentlewoman by the mother’s side, I warrant you:
        besides, we are not always bound to think those our
        fathers that marry our mothers, but those that lie with
        our mothers; and they may be gentlemen born, and born
        again for ought we know, you know.

          FA. True:
        Corruption may well be generation’s first;
        We’re bad by nature, but by custom worst.

                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                           QUOMODO’s _Shop_.

          THO. [_within_] O, my husband![1111]'
          SIM. [_within_] My father, O, my father!
          FAL. [_within_] My sweet master, dead!

                      _Enter_ SHORTYARD _and Boy_.

          SHO. Run, boy; bid ’em ring out; he’s dead, he’s
             gone.
          BOY. Then is as arrant a knave gone as e’er was called
        upon.                                           [_Exit._
          SHO. The happiest good that ever Shortyard felt!
        I want to be express’d, my mirth is such.
        To be struck now e’en when his joys were high!
        Men only kiss their knaveries, and so die;
        I’ve often mark’d it.
        He was a famous cozener while he liv’d,
        And now his son shall reap’t;[1112] I’ll ha’ the lands,
        Let him study law after; ’tis no labour
        To undo him for ever: but for Easy,
        Only good confidence did make him foolish,
        And not the lack of sense; that was not it:
        ’Tis worldly craft beats down a scholar’s wit.
        For this our son and heir now, he
        From his conception was entail’d an ass,
        And he has kept it well, twenty-five years now:
        Then the slightest art will do’t; the lands lie fair:
        No sin to beggar a deceiver’s heir.     [_Exit._
                                                  [_Bell tolls._

              _Enter_ THOMASINE _and_ WINEFRED _in haste_.

          THO. Here, Winefred, here, here, here; I have always
        found thee secret.
          WIN. You shall always find me so, mistress.
          THO. Take this letter and this ring——
                                                 [_Giving them._
          WIN. Yes, forsooth.
          THO. O, how all the parts about me shake!—inquire for
        one master Easy, at his old lodging i’ the Blackfriars.
          WIN. I will indeed, forsooth.
          THO. Tell him, the party that sent him a hundred pound
        t’other day to comfort his heart, has likewise sent him
        this letter and this ring, which has that virtue to
        recover him again for ever, say: name nobody, Winefred.
          WIN. Not so much as you, forsooth.
          THO. Good girl! thou shalt have a mourning-gown at the
        burial of mine honesty.
          WIN. And I’ll effect your will a’ my fidelity.
                                                        [_Exit._
          THO. I do account myself the happiest widow that ever
        counterfeited weeping, in that I have the leisure now
        both to do that gentleman good and do myself a pleasure;
        but I must seem like a hanging moon, a little waterish
        awhile.

             _Enter_ REARAGE _and Country Wench’s Father_.

          REAR. I entertain both thee and thy device;
        ’Twill put ’emboth to shame.
          FA. That is my hope, sir;
        Especially that strumpet.
          REAR. Save you, sweet widow!
        I suffer for your heaviness.
          THO. O master Rearage, I have lost the dearest husband
        that ever woman did enjoy!
          REAR. You must have patience yet.
          THO. O, talk not to me of patience, and[1113] you love
        me, good master Rearage.
          REAR. Yet, if all tongues go right, he did not use you
        so well as a man mought.[1114]
          THO. Nay, that’s true indeed, master Rearage; he ne’er
        used me so well as a woman might have been used, that’s
        certain; in troth, ’t’as been our greatest falling out,
        sir; and though it be the part of a widow to shew
        herself a woman for her husband’s death, yet when I
        remember all his unkindness, I cannot weep a stroke,
        i’faith, master Rearage: and, therefore, wisely did a
        great widow in this land comfort up another; Go to,
        lady, quoth she, leave blubbering; thou thinkest upon
        thy husband’s good parts when thou sheddest tears; do
        but remember how often he has lain from thee, and how
        many naughty slippery turns he has done thee, and thou
        wilt ne’er weep for him, I warrant thee. You would not
        think how that counsel has wrought with me, master
        Rearage; I could not dispend another tear now, and[1115]
        you would give me ne’er so much.
          REAR. Why, I count you the wiser, widow; it shews you
        have wisdom when you can check your passion:[1116] for
        mine own part, I have no sense to sorrow for his death,
        whose life was the only rub to my affection.
          THO. Troth, and so it was to mine: but take courage now;
        you’re a landed gentleman, and my daughter is seven
        hundred pound strong to join with you.
          REAR. But Lethe lies i’ th’ way.
          THO. Let him lie still: You shall tread o’er him, or
        I’ll fail in will.
          REAR. Sweet widow!                          [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE IV.


                       _Before_ QUOMODO’s _door_.

                _Enter_ QUOMODO _disguised as a Beadle_.

          QUO. What a beloved man did I live! My servants gall
        their fingers with ringing,[1117] my wife’s cheeks smart
        with weeping, tears stand in every corner,—you may take
        water in my house. But am not I a wise fool now? what if
        my wife should take my death so to heart that she should
        sicken upon’t, nay, swoon, nay, die? When did I hear of
        a woman do so? let me see; now I remember me, I think
        ’twas before my time; yes, I have heard of those wives
        that have wept, and sobbed, and swooned; marry, I never
        heard but they recovered again; that’s a comfort, la,
        that’s a comfort; and I hope so will mine. Peace; ’tis
        near upon the time, I see: here comes the worshipful
        Livery; I have the hospital boys;[1118] I perceive
        little Thomasine will bestow cost of me.
         I’ll listen to the common censure[1119] now,
        How the world tongues me when my ear lies low.

                        _Enter the Livery, &c._

          FIRST LIVERYMAN. Who, Quomodo? merely enrich’d by
           shifts
        And cozenages, believe it.
          QUO. I see the world is very loath to praise me;
        ’Tis rawly friends with me: I cannot blame it,
        For what I’ve[1120] done has been to vex and shame it.
        Here comes my son, the hope, the landed heir,
        One[1121] whose rare thrift will say, men’s tongues you
           lie,
        I’ll keep by law what was got craftily.

                              _Enter_ SIM.

        Methinks I hear him say so:
        He does salute the Livery with good grace
        And solemn gesture.                            [_Aside._
         O my young worshipful master, you have parted from a
        dear father, a wise and provident father!
          SIM. Art thou grown an ass now?
          QUO. Such an honest father——
          SIM. Prithee, beadle, leave thy lying; I am scarce able
        to endure thee, i’faith: what honesty didst thou e’er
        know by my father, speak? Rule your tongue, beadle, lest
        I make you prove it; and then I know what will become of
        you: ’tis the scurviest thing i’ th’ earth to belie the
        dead so, and he’s a beastly son and heir that will stand
        by and hear his father belied to his face; he will ne’er
        prosper, I warrant him. Troth, if I be not ashamed to go
        to church with him, I would I might be hanged; I
        hear[1122] such filthy tales go on him. O, if I had
        known he had been such a lewd[1123] fellow in his life,
        he should ne’er have kept me company!
          QUO. O, O, O!                                [_Aside._
          SIM. But I am glad he’s gone, though ’twere long first:
        Shortyard and I will revel it, i’faith; I have made him
        my rent-gatherer already.
          QUO. He shall be speedily disinherited, he gets not a
        foot, not the crown of a mole-hill: I’ll sooner make a
        courtier my heir, for teaching my wife tricks, than
        thee, my most neglectful son. O, now the corse; I shall
        observe yet farther.                           [_Aside._

          _A coffin brought in,[1124] followed by_ THOMASINE,
            SUSAN, THOMASINE’S _Mother, and other mourners_.

        O my most modest, virtuous, and remembering wife! she
        shall have all when I die, she shall have all.
                                                       [_Aside._

                             _Enter_ EASY.

          THO. Master Easy? ’tis: O, what shift shall I make now?
        [_Aside._]—O!

          [_Falls down in a feigned swoon, while the coffin is
              carried out; the mourners, except_ THOMASINE’S
              _Mother, following it_.

          QUO. Sweet wife, she swoons: I’ll let her alone, I’ll
        have no mercy at this time; I’ll not see her, I’ll
        follow the corse.                    [_Aside, and exit._
          EASY. The devil grind thy bones, thou cozening rascal!
          T.’S MOTH[1125] Give her a little more air; tilt up her
        head.—Comfort thyself, good widow; do not fall like a
        beast for a husband: there’s more than we can well tell
        where to put ’em, good soul.
          THO. O, I shall be well anon.
          T.’S MOTH. Fie, you have no patience, i’faith: I have
        buried four husbands, and never offered ’em such abuse.
          THO. Cousin,[1126] how do you?
          EASY. Sorry to see you ill, coz.
          THO. The worst is past, I hope.
                                   [_Pointing after the coffin._
          EASY. I hope so too.
          THO. Lend me your hand, sweet coz; I’ve[1127] troubled
             you.
          T.’S MOTH. No trouble indeed, forsooth.—Good cousin,
        have a care of her, comfort her up as much as you can,
        and all little enough, I warrant ye.           [_Exit._
          THO. My most sweet love!
          EASY. My life is not so dear.
          THO. I’ve[1128] always pitied you.
          EASY. You’ve shewn it here,
        And given the desperate hope.
          THO. Delay not now; you’ve understood my love;
        I’ve[1129] a priest ready; this is the fittest season.
        No eye offends us: let this kiss[1130]
        Restore thee to more wealth, me to more bliss.
          EASY. The angels have provided for me.     [_Exeunt._




                            ACT V. SCENE I.


                           QUOMODO’S _Shop_.

                _Enter_ SHORTYARD _with writings_.[1131]

          SHO. I have not scope enough within my breast
        To keep my joys contain’d: I’m Quomodo’s heir;
        The lands, assurances, and all are mine:
        I’ve[1132] tript his son’s heels up above the ground
        His father left him: had I not encouragement?
        Do not I know, what proves the father’s prey,
        The son ne’er looks on’t, but it melts away?
        Do not I know, the wealth that’s got by fraud,
        Slaves share it, like the riches of a bawd?
        Why, ’tis a curse unquenchable, ne’er cools;
        Knaves still commit their consciences to fools,
        And they betray who ow’d ’em. Here’s all the bonds,
        All Easy’s writings: let me see.              [_Reads._

                  _Enter_ THOMASINE _and_ EASY.[1133]

          THO. Now my desires wear crowns.
          EASY. My joys exceed:
        Man is ne’er healthful till his follies bleed.
          THO. O,
        Behold the villain, who in all those shapes
        Confounded your estate!
          EASY. That slave! that villain!
          SHO. So many acres of good meadow——
          EASY. Rascal!
          SHO. I hear you, sir.
          EASY. Rogue, Shortyard, Blastfield, sergeant, deputy,
             cozener!
          SHO. Hold, hold!
          EASY. I thirst the execution of his ears.
          THO. Hate you that office.
          EASY. I’ll strip him bare for punishment and shame.
          SHO. Why, do but hear me, sir; you will not think
        What I’ve[1134] done for you.
          EASY. Given his son my lands!
          SHO. Why, look you, ’tis not so; you’re not told true:
        I’ve cozen’d him again merely for you,
        Merely for you, sir; ’twas my meaning then
        That you should wed her, and have all agen.[1135]
        A’ my troth, it’s true, sir: look you then here, sir:
                                         [_Giving the writings._
         You shall not miss a little scroll, sir. Pray, sir,
        Let not the city know me for a knave;
        There be richer men would envy my preferment,
        If I should be known before ’em.
          EASY. Villain, my hate to more revenge is drawn:
        When slaves are found, ’tis their base art to fawn.—
        Within there!

            _Enter Officers[1136] with_ FALSELIGHT _bound_.

          SHO. How now? fresh warders!
          EASY. This is the other, bind him fast.—Have I found
             you,
        Master Blastfield?           [_Officers bind_ SHORTYARD.
          SHO. This is the fruit of craft:
        Like him that shoots up high, looks for the shaft,
        And finds it in his forehead, so does hit
        The arrow of our fate; wit destroys wit;
        The head the body’s bane and his own bears.—
        You ha’ corn enough, you need not reap mine ears,
        Sweet master Blastfield!
          EASY. I loathe his voice; away!
             [_Exeunt Officers with_ SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT.
          THO. What happiness was here! but are you sure you have
        all?
          EASY. I hope so, my sweet wife.
          THO. What difference there is in husbands! not only in
        one thing but in all.
          EASY. Here’s good deeds and bad deeds; the writings that
        keep my land[1137] to me, and the bonds that gave it
        away from me.

        These, my good deeds, shall to more safety turn,
        And these, my bad, have their deserts and burn.
        I’ll see thee again presently: read there.      [_Exit._
          THO. Did he want all, who would not love his care?
                                          [_Reads the writings._

              _Enter_ QUOMODO _disguised as before_.[1138]

          QUO. What a wife hast thou, Ephestian Quomodo! so
        loving, so mindful of her duty; not only seen to
        weep, but known to swoon! I knew a widow about Saint
        Antling’s[1139] so forgetful of her first husband,
        that she married again within the twelvemonth; nay,
        some, byrlady,[1140] within the month: there were
        sights to be seen! Had they my wife’s true sorrows,
        seven [months] nor seven years would draw ’em to the
        stake. I would most tradesmen had such a wife as I:
        they hope they have; we must all hope the best: thus
        in her honour,—
         A modest wife is such a jewel,
          Every goldsmith cannot shew it:
        He that’s honest and not cruel
          Is the likeliest man to owe[1141] it—
         and that’s I: I made it by myself; and coming to her as
        a beadle for my reward this morning, I’ll see how she
        takes my death next her heart.                 [_Aside._
          THO. Now, beadle.
          QUO. Bless your mistresship’s eyes from too many tears,
        although you have lost a wise and worshipful gentleman.
          THO. You come for your due, beadle, here i’ th’ house?
          QUO. Most certain; the hospital money, and mine own poor
        forty pence.
          THO. I must crave a discharge from you, beadle.
          QUO. Call your man; I’ll heartily set my hand to a
        memorandum.
          THO. You deal the truelier.
          QUO. Good wench still.                      [_Aside._
          THO. George!

                            _Enter Servant._

        here is the beadle come for his money; draw a memorandum
        that he has received all his due he can claim here i’
        th’ house after this funeral.
          QUO. [_Aside, while the Servant writes the memorandum_]
        What politic directions she gives him, all to secure
        herself! ’tis time, i’faith, now to pity her: I’ll
        discover myself to her ere I go; but came it off with
        some lively jest now, that were admirable. I have it:
        after the memorandum is written and all, I’ll set my own
        name to ’t, Ephestian Quomodo: she’ll start, she’ll
        wonder how Ephestian Quomodo came hither,[1142] that was
        buried yesterday: you’re beset,[1143] little Quomodo.
          THO. [_running over the memorandum_] Nineteen,
        twenty,—five pound, one, two, three [shillings], and
        fourpence.
          QUO. [_signing it_] So; we shall have good sport when
        ’tis read. [_Aside._]                  [_Exit Servant._

         _Enter_ EASY, _as_ THOMASINE _is giving the money to_
                                QUOMODO.

          EASY. How now, lady? paying away money so fast?
          THO. The beadle’s due here, sir.
          QUO. Who’s this?[1144]
        ’Tis Easy! what makes Easy in my house?
        He is not my wife’s overseer, I hope.         [_Aside._
          EASY. What’s here?
          QUO. He makes me sweat!                     [_Aside._
          EASY [_reads_]. _Memorandum, that I have received of
        Richard Easy all my due I can claim here i’ th’ house,
        or any hereafter for me: in witness whereof I have set
        to mine own hand_, EPHESTIAN QUOMODO.
          QUO. What have I done! was I mad?            [_Aside._
          EASY. _Ephestian Quomodo?_
          QUO. Ay; well, what then, sir? get you out of my house
             first,
        You master prodigal Had-land;[1145] away!
          THO. What, is the beadle drunk or mad?
        Where are my men to thrust him out a’ doors?
          QUO. Not so, good Thomasine, not so.
          THO. This fellow must be whipt.
          QUO. Thank you, good wife.
          EASY. I can no longer bear him.
          THO. Nay, sweet husband.
          QUO. Husband? I’m undone, beggared, cozened, confounded
        for ever! married already? [_Aside._]—Will it please you
        know me now, mistress Harlot and master Horner? who am I
        now?                              [_Discovers himself._
          THO. O, he’s as like my t’other husband as can be!
          QUO. I’ll have judgment; I’ll bring you before a judge:
        you shall feel, wife, whether my flesh be dead or no;
        I’ll tickle you, i’faith, i’faith.             [_Exit._
          THO. The judge that he’ll solicit knows me well.
          EASY. Let’s on then, and our grievances first tell.
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE II.


                              _A Street._

                      _Enter_ REARAGE _and_ SUSAN.

          REAR. Here they come.
          SUS. O, where?

          _Enter Officers[1146] with_ LETHE _and Country Wench
              in custody_; SALEWOOD, HELLGILL, _and_ MOTHER
              GRUEL.

          LET. Heart of shame!
        Upon my wedding morning so disgrac’d!
        Have you so little conscience, officers,
        You will not take a bribe?
          COUN. W. Master Lethe, we may lie together lawfully
        hereafter, for we are coupled together before people
        enow, i’faith.
          [_Exeunt Officers with_ LETHE _and Country Wench, &c._
          REAR. There goes the strumpet!
          SUS. Pardon my wilful blindness, and enjoy me;
        For now the difference appears too plain
        ’Twixt[1147] a base slave and a true gentleman.
          REAR. I do embrace thee in the best of love.—
        How soon affections fail, how soon they prove!
                                                      [_Exeunt._


                               SCENE III.


                  _An Apartment in the Judge’s House._

          _Enter Judge_, EASY _and_ THOMASINE _in talk with
              him_: SHORTYARD _and_ FALSELIGHT _in the custody
              of Officers_.

          JUD. His cozenages are odious: he the plaintiff!
        Not only fram’d deceitful in his life,
        But so to mock his funeral!
          EASY. Most just:
        The Livery all assembled, mourning weeds
        Throughout his house e’en down to his last servant,
        The herald richly hir’d to lend him arms
        Feign’d from his ancestors (which I dare swear knew
        No other arms but those they labour’d with),
        All preparations furnish’d, nothing wanted
        Save that which was the cause of all, his death,—
        If he be living!
          JUD. ’Twas an impious part.
          EASY. We are not certain yet it is himself,
        But some false spirit that assumes his shape,
        And seeks still to deceive me.

                            _Enter_ QUOMODO.

          QUO. O, are you come?—
        My lord, they’re here.—Good morrow, Thomasine.
          JUD. Now, what are you?
         QUO. I’m[1148] Quomodo, my lord, and this my wife;
        Those my two men, that are bound wrongfully.
          JUD. How are we sure you’re he?
          QUO. O, you cannot miss, my lord!
          JUD. I’ll try you:
        Are you the man that liv’d the famous cozener?
          QUO. O no, my lord!
          JUD. Did you deceive this gentleman of his right,
        And laid nets o’er his land?
          QUO. Not I, my lord.
          JUD. Then you’re not Quomodo, but a counterfeit.—
        Lay hands on him, and bear him to the whip.
          QUO. Stay, stay a little,
        I pray.—Now I remember me, my lord,
        I cozen’d him indeed; ’tis wondrous true.
          JUD. Then I dare swear this is no counterfeit:
        Let all doubts cease; this man is Quomodo.
          QUO. Why, la, you now, you would not believe this?
        I am found what I am.
          JUD. But setting these thy odious shifts apart,
        Why did that thought profane enter thy breast,
        To mock the world with thy supposed death?
          QUO. Conceive you not that, my lord? a policy.
          JUD. So.
          QUO. For having gotten the lands, I thirsted still
        To know what fate would follow ’em——
          JUD. Being ill got.
          QUO. Your lordship apprehends me.
          JUD. I think I shall anon.
          QUO. And thereupon,
        I, out of policy, possess’d my son,
        Which since I have found lewd;[1149] and now intend
        To disinherit him for ever.
        Not only this was in my death set down,
        But thereby a firm trial of my wife,
        Her constant sorrows, her rememb’ring virtues;
        All which are clews; the shine of a next morning
        Dries ’em up all, I see’t.
          JUD. Did you profess wise cozenage, and would dare
        To put a woman to her two days’ choice,
        When oft a minute does it?
          QUO. Less, a moment,
        The twinkling of an eye, a glimpse, scarce something
           does it.[1150]
        Your lordship yet will grant she is my wife?
          THO. O heaven!
          JUD. After some penance and the dues of law,
        I must acknowledge that.
          QUO. I scarce like
        Those dues of law.
          EASY. My lord,
        Although the law too gently ’lot his wife,
        The wealth he left behind he cannot challenge.
          QUO. How?
          EASY. Behold his hand against it.
                                            [_Shewing writings._
          QUO. He does devise all means to make me mad,
        That I may no more lie with my wife
        In perfect memory; I know’t: but yet
        The lands will maintain me in my wits;
        The land[s] will do so much for me.
          JUD. [_reads_] _In witness whereof I have set to mine
        own hand_, EPHESTIAN QUOMODO.
        ’Tis firm enough your own, sir.
          QUO. A jest, my lord; I did I knew not what.
          JUD. It should seem so: deceit is her own foe;
        Craftily gets, and childishly lets go.
        But yet the lands are his.
          QUO. I warrant ye.
          EASY. No, my good lord, the lands know the right heir;
        I am their master once more.
          QUO. Have you the lands?
          EASY. Yes, truly, I praise heaven.
          QUO. Is this good dealing?
        Are there such consciences abroad? How,
        Which way could he come by ’em?
          SHO. My lord,
        I’ll quickly resolve[1151] you that it comes to me.
        This cozener, whom too long I call’d my patron,
        To my thought dying, and the fool his son
        Possess’d of all, which my brain partly sweat for,
        I held it my best virtue, by a plot
        To get from him what for him was ill got——
          QUO. O beastly Shortyard!
          SHO. When, no sooner mine,
        But I was glad more quickly to resign.
          JUD. Craft once discover’d shews her abject line.
          QUO. He hits me every where; for craft once known
        Does teach fools wit, leaves the deceiver none.
        My deeds have cleft me, cleft me!             [_Aside._

          _Enter Officers with_ LETHE _and the Country Wench_;
              REARAGE, SUSAN, SALEWOOD, HELLGILL, _and_ MOTHER
              GRUEL.

          FIRST OFF. Room there.
          QUO. A little yet to raise my spirit,
        Here master Lethe comes to wed my daughter:
        That’s all the joy is left me.—Hah! who’s this?
          JUD. What crimes have those brought forth?
          SALE.[1152] The shame of lust:
        Most viciously on this his wedding morning
        This man was seiz’d in shame with that bold strumpet.
          JUD. Why, ’tis she he means to marry.
          LET. No, in truth.
          JUD. In truth you do:
        Who for his wife his harlot doth prefer,
        Good reason ’tis that he should marry her.
          COUN. W. I crave it on my knees; such was his vow at
             first.
          HELL. I’ll say so too, and work out mine own safety.—
                                                       [_Aside._
         Such was his vow at first indeed, my lord,
        Howe’er his mood has chang’d him.
          LET. O vild[1153] slave!
          COUN. W. He says it true, my lord.
          JUD. Rest content,
        He shall both marry and taste punishment.
          LET. O, intolerable! I beseech your good lordship, if I
        must have an outward punishment, let me not marry an
        inward, whose lashes[1154] will ne’er out, but grow
        worse and worse. I have a wife stays for me this morning
        with seven hundred pound in her purse: let me be
        speedily whipt and be gone, I beseech your lordship.
          SALE.[1155] He speaks no truth, my lord: behold the
             virgin,
        Wife to a well-esteemed gentleman,
        Loathing the sin he follows.
          LET. I was betray’d; yes, faith.
          REAR. His own mother,[1156] my lord,
        Which he confess’d through ignorance and disdain,
        His name so chang’d to abuse the world and her.
          LET. Marry a harlot, why not? ’tis an honest man’s
        fortune. I pray, did not one of my countrymen marry my
        sister? why, well then, if none should be married but
        those that are honest, where should a man seek a wife
        after Christmas? I pity that gentleman that has nine
        daughters to bestow, and seven of ’em seeded already;
        they will be good stuff by that time.
         I do beseech your lordship to remove
        The punishment; I am content to marry her.
          JUD. There’s no removing of your punishment—
          LET. O, good my lord!
          JUD. Unless one here assembled,
        Whom you have most unnaturally abus’d,
        Beget your pardon.
          LET. Who should that be?
        Or who would do’t that has been so abus’d?
        A troublesome penance!—Sir——
          QUO. Knave in your face! leave your mocking,
        Andrew; marry your quean, and be quiet.
          LET. Master Easy——
          EASY. I’m sorry you take such a bad course, sir.
          LET. Mistress[1157] Quomodo——
          THO. Inquire my right name again[1158] next time; now go
        your ways like an ass as you came.
          LET. Mass, I forget my mother all this while; I’ll make
        her do’t at first.—Pray, mother, your blessing for once.
          MOTH. G. Call’st me mother? out, I defy[1159] thee,
        slave!
          LET. Call me slave as much as you will, but do not shame
        me now: let the world know you are my mother.
          MOTH. G. Let me not have this villain put upon me, I
        beseech your lordship.
          JUD. He’s justly curs’d: she loathes to know him now,
        Whom he before did as much loathe to know.—
        Wilt thou believe me, woman?
          MOTH. G. That’s soon done.
          JUD. Then know him for a villain; ’tis thy son.
          MOTH. G. Art thou Andrew, my wicked son Andrew?
          LET. You would not believe me, mother.
          MOTH. G. How art thou changed! Is this suit fit for
        thee, a tooth-drawer’s son? This country has e’en
        spoiled thee since thou earnest hither: thy manners
        [were] better than thy clothes, but now whole clothes
        and ragged manners: it may well be said that truth goes
        naked; for when thou hadst scarce a shirt, thou hadst
        more truth about thee.
          JUD. Thou art thine own affliction, Quomodo.
        Shortyard, we banish thee; it is our pleasure.[1160]
          SHO. Henceforth no woman shall complain for measure.
          JUD. And that all error from our works may stand,
        We banish Falselight evermore the land.
                                                [_Exeunt omnes._




                             END OF VOL. I.








                                LONDON:
                PRINTED BY LEVEY, ROBSON, AND FRANKLYN,
                         46 St. Martin’s Lane.

                               Footnotes

-----

# 1:

  Or _Midleton_.

# 2:

  In _Harl. MS._ 1116, fol. 115, is a note of this grant to William
  Middleton; but it supplies no information about his place of
  residence. The Middletons of Middleton Hall bore “Argent, a saltier
  ingrailed Sable:” he does not appear, however, to have belonged to
  that family; see Nicolson and Burns’s _Hist. of West. and Cumb._, vol.
  i. p. 255.

  I may add, that from the dedication of _The Triumphs of Truth_ to Sir
  Thomas Middleton, Lord Mayor of London in 1613, we learn that our
  dramatist was not related to him: “next, in that myself, though
  unworthy, being of _one name_ with your lordship ... as if one fate
  did prosperously cleave to _one name_,” &c., vol. v. p. 217. The
  family of Sir Thomas Middleton was of Denbigh: he was brother to Sir
  Hugh Middleton.

# 3:

  _Dethicks Guifts_, _Vincent_ 162, fol. 215, Coll. Arms.

# 4:

  Of the various persons named William Middleton whose wills are extant,
  I cannot identify one with the father of the poet.

# 5:
“WILLIMUS = ANNA filia  EDWARDUS = BARBARA fil.
MIDLETON  | Will. Snow  MORBECK  |  Will. Palmer
de London | de London            |  de co. Warr.
          |                  +---+
          |                  |
      +---+---------------------------------------------+
      |                      |                          |
THOMAS MIDLETON        = MARIA fil. et co-hær.   Avicia uxor Johis
de Newington in com.   | Edv. Morbeck            Empson de London
Surrey chronographus   | de London unus 6.       renupta Alano
ciuitatis London 1623. | Clericorum Cancellariæ. Waterer de
                       |                         London
              EDWARDUS MIDLETON
                fil. et hæres ætatis 19
                annoque 1623.”

  C 2. _Vis. Surrey_, 1623, p. 328, Coll. Arms.—This pedigree
  (translated) is also in _Harl. MS._ 1046, fol. 209.

# 6:

  “Amy” in _Harl. MS._

# 7:

  Mr. Campbell observes, that some verses, which will be afterwards
  cited, “allude to the poet’s white locks, so that he was probably born
  as early as the middle of the 16th century.”—_Spec. of the Brit.
  Poets_, vol. iii. p. 118. The verses in question I believe to be a
  forgery of Chetwood.

# 8:

  “Mary” in _Harl. MS._

# 9:

  “Marbecke” in _Harl. MS._,—rightly perhaps. I can find no mention of
  him elsewhere.

# 10:

  _Harl. MS._ 1912, fol. 52.—No record of their admission is preserved
  in Gray’s Inn.

# 11:

  In the Library of the Edinburgh University is a unique copy of
  _Epigrams and Satires: Made by Richard Middleton of Yorke Gentleman,
  London_, 1608. 4to. The Epistle Dedicatory is addressed “To the
  Gentleman of condigne desert William Bellasses.” The Epigrams end on
  p. 19; the Satires, entitled _Times Metamorphoses_, occupy the
  remainder of the work, which extends in all to 39 pages. The author is
  a wretched scribbler, and sometimes uses the grossest language.

# 12:

  _The Silkewormes, and their Flies: Liuely described in verse, by T.
  M._, &c. _London_, 1599. 4to, is certainly not by Middleton: according
  to some authorities, the writer’s name was Moffat.

    In _England’s Parnassus, or The Choysest Flowers of our Moderne
  Poets_, &c. 1600, 8vo, the following quotations are found:

                             “These two parts belong
           Vnto true knowledge, words and teares haue force
           To mooue compassion in the sauage mindes
           Of brutish people reason-wanting kindes.
                   _Tho. Middleton._” (p. 281, under “Teares.”)

            “There neuer shall bee any age so cleere,
            But in her smoothe face shall some faults appeare.
                    _Th. Middl._” (p. 321, under “World.”)

  But the compiler has given them to our author by mistake: both are
  taken from _The Legend of Humphrey Duke of Glocester_, written by
  CHRISTOPHER Middleton; see the reprint of that poem in the tenth vol.
  of _The Harleian Miscellany_, p. 170 and p. 182. ed. Park.

    _Corona Minervæ. Or a Masque Presented before Prince Charles his
  Highnesse, The Duke of Yorke his Brother, and the Lady Mary his
  Sister, the 27th of February, at the Colledge of the Mvseum Minervæ._
  _London_, 1635. 4to, has been ascribed to Middleton by those who were
  not aware that he was dead at that period.

    Lowndes (_Bibliog. Manual_) attributes to Middleton _The pleasant
  comodie of Patient Grissell_, 1607, and a short tract called _Sir
  Robert Sherley sent Ambassadour, in the name of the King of Persia, to
  Sigismond the Third_, &c. &c. 1609. 4to. The former piece was written
  by Dekker, Chettle, and Haughton (see Malone’s _Shakespeare_, by
  Boswell, vol. iii. p. 323); the latter (which is reprinted in _The
  Harleian Miscellany_, vol. v.) has no author’s name, and, as far as I
  can discover, contains nothing to indicate that it is by Middleton.

# 13:

  In act iii. scene 1. (vol. i. p. 48), the Clerk having read from the
  church-book “_Agatha, the daughter of Pollux—born in an. 1540_,” adds,
  “and NOW ’TIS 99.” Similar notices have served to ascertain the
  periods at which several other old dramas were first brought upon the
  stage; but they are not always to be relied on as evidence to that
  effect. In our author’s _No Wit, No Help like a Woman’s_, act iii.
  scene 1. (vol. v. p. 87), Weatherwise says, “If I, that have proceeded
  in five-and-twenty such books of astronomy, should not be able to put
  down a scholar _now in one thousand six hundred thirty and eight_, the
  dominical letter being G, I stood for a goose.” That Middleton wrote
  this play there cannot, I think, be any doubt; but as he had been dead
  about ten years before 1638, that date must have been inserted by the
  actors when the piece was revived.

# 14:

  Malone’s _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. iii. p. 327.

# 15:

  _Id. ibid._ There can be no question that this is the piece which,
  according to Mr. Collier, in a part of Henslowe’s Diary not cited by
  Malone, is called _The Chester Tragedy_. _Hist. of Engl. Dram.
  Poetry_, vol. iii. p. 102. When Malone (_ubi supra_) observed, that
  _Randall Earl of Chester_ “was probably _The Mayor of Queenborough_,”
  he must have utterly forgotten the subject of the latter play.

  Weber erroneously states that Middleton “wrote in combination with
  Ford.” Introd. to _Works of Beaumont and Fletcher_, p. xliv.

# 16:

  _Lansdown MS. 807._—This play was entered on the Stationers’ Books
  Sept. 9, 1653.

# 17:

  In vol. v. p. 527 and p. 562, I followed Mr. Collier’s statement
  (_Bridgewater House Catalogue_, p. 200), that Nash died during 1604,
  because in _The Black Book_ he is described as alive, and in _Father
  Hubburd’s Tales_ he is spoken of as dead, both these pieces having
  been published in 1604. But Nash must have died earlier; for, in _The
  Returne from Pernassus_, 1606, which internal evidence proves to have
  been written before the decease of Elizabeth, he is mentioned as being
  “in his mournefull chest,” sig. B 3; and the _Black Book_, though
  perhaps not printed, must have been composed, anterior to 1604.
  Whatever may have been the date of Nash’s death, Malone (see note vol.
  v. p. 561) was assuredly mistaken in interpreting the expression
  “humorous theft,” to mean that Rowlands had stolen _The letting of
  humours blood in the head vaine_, &c. from Nash: that piece is much
  too weak and spiritless to have been the production of the former.

# 18:

  Continuation of Stow’s _Annales_, p. 928, ed. 1615.

# 19:

  He had previously (in 1603) written a copy of verses for Dekker’s
  _Entertainment to King James_, &c.: see vol. v. p. 203.

# 20:

  This pageant is placed as an Appendix to vol. v.

# 21:

  Heath’s _Account of the Worshipful Company of Grocers_, p. 331.
  London, 1829 (privately printed). In the same document are these
  entries:

  “Benevolences and Rewards to Officers and others which took paines
  about the sayde busynesse, with other particuler charges as followeth,

                                                          £.   _s._ _d._

 Payde and given in benevolence to Anthony Monday,
   gentⁿ, for his paynes in drawing a project for this
   busynesse which was offered to the Comyttee               5   0 0

 Payde and given to Mr. Deckar for the like                  4   0 0”

                                                                 p. 335.

# 22:

  “There are two MSS. of this Author’s [Middleton’s] in being which have
  never been taken notice of in any Accoᵗ. of him. They were sold in an
  Auction of Books at the Apollo Coffee House in Fleet Street abᵗ the
  year 1735 by Edw Lewis but puffd up to a great price, bought back, &
  coud not afterwᵈˢ be recoverd. They are entitled I. _Annales_: or a
  Continuation of Chronologie; conteyninge Passages and Occurrences
  proper to the Honnoᵇˡᵉ Citty of London: Beginninge in the Yeare of our
  Lorde 1620. By Thomas Midleton then received by their Honnoᵇˡᵉ Senate
  as Chronologer for the Cittye. There are in it, these Articles under
  the year 1621.—On Good Fryday in the Morn died John (King) Lord Bp. of
  London.—28 May Fra. Lᵈ Verulam committed to the Tower. (Seal taken
  from him the last day of April).—27 Decʳ. Sʳ Edwᵈd Coke Committed to
  the Tower.—Decʳ. The Fortune Play House, situate between White Cross
  Street and Golding Lane, burnt, &c. II. _Middleton’s Farrago_: In
  which there is—The Earl of Essex his Charge agᵗ Viscᵗ. Wimbleton, &
  the Viscᵗˢ. Answʳ.—The Treaty and Articles of Marriage between Pr.
  Cha: & Hen: Maria.—Parliamentary Matters, 1625-26.—Habeas Corpus 1627
  &c.” _MS. note by Oldys_ on Langbaine’s _Account of Engl. Dram.
  Poets_, p. 370. (British Museum.)

# 23:

  _Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poetry_, vol. i. p. 453.

# 24:

  _Apology for the Believers in the Shakspeare-Papers_, p. 497, sqq.

# 25:

  The original is in the State Paper Office: for the transcript I am
  indebted to Mr. J. P. Collier.

# 26:

  Chalmers’s _Apology for the Believers_, &c. p. 500.

# 27:

  Capell’s _Notes on Shakespeare_, vol. iii. p. 31. (_School of Sh._)

# 28:

  “According to this statement,” says Malone, “they received above
  166_l._ 12_s._ on each performance. The foregoing extracts [from Sir
  Henry Herbert’s Office-book] show, that there is not even a semblance
  of truth in this story. In the year 1685, when the London theatres
  were much enlarged, and the prices of admission greatly increased,
  Shadwell received by his third day on the representation of The Squire
  of Alsatia, only 130_l._, which Downes the prompter says was the
  greatest receipt had been ever taken at Drury-lane playhouse at single
  prices. _Roscius Anglicanus_, p. 41. The use of Arabick figures has
  often occasioned very gross errors to pass current in the world. I
  suppose the utmost receipt from the performance of Middleton’s play
  for nine days (if it was performed so often), could not amount to more
  than one hundred and fifty pounds. To the sum of 150_l._ which perhaps
  this old actor had seen as the profit made by this play, his fancy or
  his negligence added a cipher, and thus made fifteen hundred pounds.
  The play of Holland’s Leaguer [by Marmyon] was acted six days
  successively at Salisbury Court, in December 1631, and yet Sir Henry
  Herbert received on account of the six representations but _one pound
  nineteen shillings_, in virtue of the _ninth_ share which he possessed
  as one of the proprietors of that house. Supposing there were twenty-
  one shares divided among the actors, the piece, though performed with
  such extraordinary success, did not produce more than _six pounds ten
  shillings_ each night, exclusive of the occasional nightly charges
  already mentioned.” Malone’s _Shakespeare_ (by Boswell), vol. iii. p.
  177.

# 29:

  _Hist. of Engl. Dram. Poetry_, vol. i. p. 451.

# 30:

  _Letters_, p. 123, ed. 1678. The letter is dated “Aug. 15, 1623;” and
  the last Editor of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, after citing the passage,
  says, “This remark was made in the August of the year preceding the
  calling of Middleton before the Privy Council, and must therefore
  allude to some other play than the _Game of [at] Chess_,” vol. v. p.
  279. Let us hear Oldys: “The first edition [of Howel’s _Letters_] in
  Q^o 1645 is in Six Parts or Sections; but no dates to any of the
  Letters: _Hence so many Errors when he did date them_.” _MS. note on_
  Langbaine’s _Account of Engl. Dram. Poets_, p. 279. (British Museum.)

# 31:

  Act iii. scene 1,—_Works_, by Gifford, vol. v. p. 247.

# 32:

  P. xii.

# 33:

  Written, we are told, by Sir William Lower, on Middleton’s _Michaelmas
  Term_. They are given by Chetwood in “An Account of the Author,”
  prefixed to a reprint of _Blurt Master Constable_, which forms part of
  a small volume entitled _A Select Collection of Old Plays_, Dublin,
  1750. Middleton, as Chetwood previously informs us, “lived to a very
  great age.... We may judge of his longævity by his works; since his
  first play was acted in 1601, and his last in 1665[!].... That he was
  much esteem’d by his brother poets, we may judge by four lines of sir
  William Lower upon his comedy call’d _A Michaelmas Term_, 1663”! Now,
  _Michaelmas Term_ was certainly not produced in Middleton’s “halting
  age,” having been licensed the 15th May, 1607, and printed during the
  same year; see vol. i. p. 413; there is no edition of it bearing date
  1663; and, moreover, _Sir William Lower died in_ 1662. The lines are
  cited indeed by Oldys, in a MS. note on Langbaine’s _Account of Engl.
  Dram. Poets_, p. 373 (British Museum); but he doubtless copied them
  from Chetwood’s volume, of which he has transcribed the title, p. 371.

# 34:

  See p. xiii.

# 35:

  The following extracts from the same Records shew the various persons
  who succeeded Middleton in the office of City Chronologer till it was
  finally abolished.

                                    “Martis Secundo die Septembris 1628
                                  Annoque RRs Caroli Angliæ &c quarto.

      Hamersly Mayor.        Item: this daie Beniamyn Johnson[35A] Gent
   Rep. No. 42. f. 271.    is by this Court admitted to be the Citties,
                           Chronologer in place of Mr. Thomas Middleton
                           deceased, to have hold exercise and enioye
                           the same place and to have and receive for
                           that his service out of the Chamber of London
                           the some of one hundred Nobles per Annum to
                           contynue duringe the pleasure of this Court
                           and the First quarters payment to begin att
                           Michaelmas next.”

                                    “Jovis decimo die Novembris 1631
                                  Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Angliæ &c
                                  septimo.

      Whitmore Mayor.        Item: it is ordered by this Court that Mr.
     Rep. N. 46. f. 8.     Chamberlen shall forbeare to pay any more fee
                           or wages unto Beniamine Johnson the Citties
                           Chronologer until he shall haue presented
                           unto this Court some fruits of his labours in
                           that his place.”

                                    “Martis xxvijͦ die Augusti 1633
                                  Annoque RRs Caroli Angliæ &c nono.

      Raynton Mayor.         Item: this day upon the humble peticion of
    Rep. N. 47. f. 336.    Edward Hewes sometimes the Citties
                           Chronologer this Court in consideration of
                           his bye and good services formerly performed
                           in his said place doth order that Mr
                           Chamberlen shall pay unto him as of the guift
                           of this Court the summe of xx^{ls}.”

                                    “Jovis xviijͦ die Septembris 1634
                                  Annoque RRs Caroli Angliæ &c decimo.

      Mowlson Mayor.         Item: this day Mr Recorder and Sir James
    Rep. N. 48. f. 433.    Hamersley Knight and Alderman declared unto
                           this Court His Majesty’s pleasure signified
                           unto them by the right honoᵇˡᵉ the Earle of
                           Dorsett for and in the behalfe of Beniamine
                           Johnson the Cittyes Chronologer, Whereupon it
                           is ordered by this Court that his yearely
                           pencion of one hundred nobles out of the
                           Chamber of London shalbe continued and that
                           Mr Chamberlen shall satisfie and pay unto him
                           his arrerages thereof.”

                                    “Martis quarto die Februarii 1639
                                  Annoque RRs Caroli Angliæ &c xvᵗᵒ.

       Garway Mayor.         Item: this day att the request of the right
   Rep. N. 54. f. 86.^b    hoᵇˡᵉ the Earle of Dorsett signified unto
                           this Court by his letter this Court is
                           pleased to retaine and admitt Francis Quarles
                           Gent to bee the Citties Chronologer to have
                           hold and enioy the same place with a fee of
                           one hundred Nobles per annum, for and during
                           the pleasure of this Court and this payment
                           to begin from Christmas last.”

                                    “Martis primo die Octobri 1644
                                  Annoque RRs Caroli Angliæ &c vicesimo.

     Wollaston Mayor.        Item: this day Gualter Frost Esquire
   Rep. N. 57. f. 219.^b   Swordbearer of this Citty is by this Court
                           admitted the Citties Chronologer to have hold
                           exercise and enioy the same place with the
                           fee thereunto appointed soe long as hee shall
                           well demeane himselfe therein and present
                           once a yeare yearely something of his labours
                           in this behalfe.”

                                    “Jovis xxviijͦ die Februarii 1660
                                  Annoque Caroli Secundi Angliæ &c xiiiͦ.

       Browne Mayor.         This day John Burroughs Esq^{re}. is by
    Rep. N. 67. f. 208.    this Court admitted the Citties Chronologer
                           (the same place being now void and having soe
                           beene for severall yeares past) To have hold
                           exercise and enjoy the same place and to have
                           and receive for his service to bee performed
                           therein out of the Chamber of London the
                           summe of one hundred Nobles per annum to
                           continue during the pleasure of this Court,
                           And the first quarters payment to bee made at
                           Lady day next.”

                                    “Commune Consil. tent. in Camera
                                  Guihaldi Civitatis London die Lune
                                  vicesimo tertio die Novembris Anno
                                  Domini 1668 Annoque RRs Caroli Secundi
                                  vicesimo.

       Turner Mayor.         At this Court the Committee appointed to
   Jour. No. 46. f. 251.   consider the State of the Chamber did deliver
                           their report in writeing under their hands of
                           their proceedings hitherto in that affair the
                           Tenor whereof followeth viz.

                                  To the Right honorable the Lord Major
                                  and to the Right worshipfull the
                                  Aldermen and Commons of the Citty of
                                  London in Common Council assembled.

                             It is humbly represented by the Committee
                           appointed by order of this Honorable Court of
                           the xii^{th} of February last to consider the
                           State of the Chamber &c. inter alia,

                             That the yearly payment of one hundred
                           Nobles to one —— Bradshaw called the Citties
                           Chronologer be discontinued with the place
                           there appearing no occasion for such an
                           Officer.”

                                    “Comune Consil. tent in Camera
                                  Guihaldi Civitatis London die Jovis
                                  vicesimo quarto die Februarii Anno
                                  Domini 1669 Annoque Regni Regis Caroli
                                  Secundi &c xxiiͦ.

      Starling Mayor.        Upon the peticion of Cornewall Bradshaw
   Jour. N. 47. f. 26.^b   Gent late the Citties Chronologer for some
                           recompence for his Sallary of thirty three
                           pounds six shillings and eightpence payable
                           out of the Chamber of London which hath been
                           taken from him by vote of the Court—It is
                           ordered that upon resigning of his said place
                           to the Court of Aldermen Mʳ Chamberlen shall
                           pay him one hundred pounds in full of all
                           Claimes for his said place.”

                                    “Jovis xviiͦ die Martii 1669 Annoque
                                  R.R’s Caroli Secundi Angliæ &c xxiiͦ.

      Starling Mayor.        This day Cornewall Bradshawe who in the
   Rep. N. 75. f. 136^b.   time of the Mayoralty of Sir Thomas Bludworth
                           Knight and Alderman was admitted the Citties
                           Chronologer during the pleasure of this Court
                           here present did freely surrender upp unto
                           this Court the said place and all his right
                           and interest therein, of which surrender this
                           Court did accept and allowe.”

       Ibid. f. 139.         “This day at the humble desire of ——
                           Bradshaw late Chronologer of this Citty this
                           Court doth grant unto him the nominacion and
                           benefitt of making one person free of this
                           Citty by redempcion paying to Mr. Chamberlen
                           the summe of five pounds.”

# 35A:

  Gifford (_Memoirs of Ben Jonson_, p. clxii.) mentions that “the city,
  from whom he [Jonson] had been accustomed to receive an annual sum by
  way of securing his services when occasion called for them, seem to
  have watched the moment of declining favour, and withdrawn their
  bounty;” but does not appear to have known either that Jonson had been
  officially appointed Chronologer, or that his pension (see the fourth
  entry) was afterwards restored.

# 36:

  P. xiii.

# 37:

  _Life of Shakespeare_ (1821), p. 225. Drayton made great alterations
  in new editions of his poems: the “commendation” of Middleton may
  perhaps be found in the first impression of one of his numerous
  pieces, which I have not seen. The _Life of Drayton_, by Robert Bell,
  Esq., in a recently published volume of Lardner’s _Cyclopædia_, is a
  tissue of the most absurd mistakes.

# 38:

  P. 811.

# 39:

  _Extracts from the Hawthornden Manuscripts_, &c., by Mr. D. Laing, p.
  86—a very interesting series of papers, which originally appeared in
  the _Archæologia Scotica_, vol. iv. Parts i. and ii.

  In an address “To the Readers” prefixed to the 4to of _Sejanus_, 1605,
  Ben Jonson says, “Lastly, I would inform you, that this book, in all
  numbers, is not the same with that which was acted on the public
  stage; wherein a second pen had good share: in place of which, I have
  rather chosen to put weaker, and, no doubt, less pleasing, of mine
  own, than to defraud so happy a genius of his right by my loathed
  usurpation.” On this passage Gifford remarks, “Why might not Chapman
  or Middleton be intended here? they, like Shakspeare [who, according
  to the commentators, was the person alluded to], were living in habits
  of kindness with the poet: they wrote in conjunction with him; they
  were both men of learning; and no great violation seems offered to
  language (at least no greater than courtesy would excuse) in terming
  them _happy geniuses_.” Gifford, however, concludes that Fletcher was
  the person actually meant. See B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. iii. pp. 6,
  7, 8.

# 40:

  P. 72—_Workes_, 1630.

# 41:

  P. 206.

# 42:

  P. 12. reprint, 1817. There are several editions of _Wit’s
  Recreations_. Octavius Gilchrist (note on Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, vol.
  v. p. 281, last ed.) cites these lines from ed. 1641; but they are not
  to be found in a copy of that impression which is now before me.

# 43:

  This collection included _The First Part of the Honest Whore_—not then
  known to be partly written by Middleton (vol. iii.), _A Mad World, my
  Masters_ (vol. v.), _The Widow_ (vol. vi.), _The Mayor of
  Queenborough_ (vol. xi.). In an unpublished letter from Bishop
  Warburton to Dodsley is the following passage: “But why would you give
  us such stuff as _Fuimus Troes_, _Grim the Collier_, and
  _Microcosmus_, rather than three other good comedies (if there be so
  many) of Middleton’s?” _Blurt Master Constable_ was reprinted in a
  volume edited by Chetwood, and entitled _A Select Collection of Old
  Plays_, Dublin, 1750. In the second edition of Dodsley’s _Old Plays_,
  1780, Reed inserted _The Second Part of the Honest Whore_ (vol. iii.)
  and _The Roaring Girl_ (vol. vi.).

# 44:

  Pearson had purchased it from the collection of Griffin the player: it
  is now among the books and MSS. which were bequeathed by Malone to the
  Bodleian Library.

# 45:

  See notes, vol. iii. p. 303 and p. 328. It is entitled _Macbeth, A
  Tragædy. With all the Alterations, Amendments, Additions, and New
  Songs. As it’s now Acted at the Dukes Theatre_, 1674. 4to. Of this
  wretched piece (which probably few readers have seen) I subjoin a
  specimen.


                               “_An Heath._

                 _Enter Lady Macduff, Maid, and Servant._

    _La. Macd._ Art sure this is the place my Lord appointed
  Us to meet him?
    _Serv._ This is the entrance o’ th’ Heath; and here
  He order’d me _to attend him with the Chariot_.”

  Presently the Witches are heard singing a great deal of nonsense: part
  of it runs thus,—

             “Ill deeds are seldom slow;
             Nor single: following crimes on former wait,
             _The worst of creatures fastest propagate_.
             Many more murders must this one ensue,
             _As if in death were propagation too_.” &c. &c.

    “_Macd._ I am glad you are not affraid.
    _La. Macd._ I would not willingly to fear submit:
  None can fear ill, but those that merit it.
    _Macd._ Am I made bold by her? how strong a guard
  Is innocence! if any one would be
  Reputed valiant, let him learn of you;
  Vertue both courage is and safety too.
                                                  [_A dance of witches._

                     _Enter two_ [_three_] _Witches_.

    _Macd._ These seem foul spirits; I’ll speak to ’em.
  If you can any thing by more than nature know,
  You may in those prodigious times fore-tell
  Some ill we may avoid.
    _1 Witch._ Saving thy blond will cause it to be shed.
    _2 Witch._ He’ll bleed by thee, by whom thou first hast bled.
    _3 Witch._ Thy wife shall shunning danger, dangers find,
  And fatal be to whom she most is kind.
                                                        [_Ex. witches._”
                                                   Act ii. last scene.

# 46:

  Perhaps 1610 was its earliest season: see Collier’s _New Particulars
  regarding the Works of Shakespeare_, p. 24.

# 47:

  See _Life of Shakespeare_ (1821), p. 420 sqq.

# 48:

  “The former [Middleton] was a man of considerable powers, who has
  lately been the object of much discussion, on account of the liberal
  use which Shakspeare is ascertained to have made of his recently
  discovered tragi-comedy, _The Witch_.” Introd. to Massinger’s _Works_,
  vol. i. p. liv. ed. 1813.

  “Yet the spleen of Davies is more tolerable than the tedious absurdity
  of the other commentators, who labour to justify our great poet’s
  pronunciation of this word [Hecate] from a mass of contemporary
  authorities, as if it was not a matter of the utmost indifference, and
  determined, in every case, by the measure of the verse. Shakspeare
  gave the word as he found it in Middleton, without caring whether it
  were a dissyllable or a trisyllable,” &c. Note on B. Jonson’s _Works_,
  vol. vi. p. 282.

  “The production of this Masque [_The Masque of Queens_] has subjected
  Jonson to a world of unmerited obloquy from the commentators. It was
  written, it seems, ‘on account of the success of Shakspeare’s Witches,
  which alarmed the jealousy of a man, who fancied himself his rival, or
  rather his superior.’ And this is repeated through a thousand mouths.
  Not to observe, that if Jonson was moved by any such passion, it must
  be by Middleton’s Witches, not Shakspeare’s (for the latter is but a
  copyist himself, in this case),” &c. Note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol.
  vii. p. 115. I ought to mention, that when Gifford threw out these
  remarks, Malone had not declared his ultimate opinion on the subject.

# 49:

  Middleton, as I have shewn in my notes on _The Witch_, had carefully
  consulted the celebrated work of Reginald Scot.

# 50:

  See the excellent remarks of Lamb, cited in vol. iii. p. 329.

# 51:

  _Retrospective Review_, vol. viii. p. 135.

# 52:

  _Lectures on Dram. Literature_, p. 79.

# 53:

  Campbell’s _Specimens of the Brit. Poets_, vol. iii. p. 118.

# 54:

  Of _The Roaring Girl_ I believe that Middleton wrote by far the
  greater portion; but of the two other plays which he produced in
  conjunction with Dekker—_The First and Second Parts of the Honest
  Whore_—I have no doubt that his share is comparatively small.

# 55:

  See _Your Five Gallants_ and _The Family of Love_.

# 56:

  _Retrospective Review_, vol. viii. p. 126.

# 57:

          _senatus_] Old ed. “senatum.”

# 58:

          _He is_] Old ed. “Hees.”

# 59:

          _there is_] Old ed. “ther’s.”

# 60:

          _Wants some_ two _of threescore_.] “Sim.’s impatience
          of his mother’s death leads him into an error here: it
          appears, p. 17, that she wanted _five_ of that
          number.”—GIFFORD.

# 61:

          _have_] Old ed. “hath.”

# 62:

          _Dic quibus_, &c.] Virgil, _Ecl._ iii. 104.

# 63:

          _nomothetæ_] Old ed. “nomotheta.”

# 64:

          _chreokopia_] Old ed. “Crecopedi.”—“Χρεωκοπια
          signifies the cutting off that part of the debt which
          arose from the interest of the sum lent.”—M. MASON.

# 65:

          _full allow’d_] i. e. fully approved.

# 66:

          _seisactheia_] Old ed. “Sisaithie.”—“Σεισαχθεια, i. e.
          a shaking off a burthen, metaphorically an abolition
          of debt.”—GIFFORD.

# 67:

          _old is_] Old ed. “old’s.”

# 68:

          _He is_] Old ed. “Hees.”

# 69:

          _passions_] “i. e. pathetic speeches.”—GIFFORD.

# 70:

          _allow_] i. e. approve.

# 71:

          _both do_] Old ed. “_both do_ both.”

# 72:

          _which_] Old ed. “_which_ that.”

# 73:
          CLEAN. _And so it does;
            The church-book overthrows it, if you read it
          well._] “Cleanthes and the lawyer are at cross
          purposes. The latter observes, that the church-book
          (by which he means the register of births kept there)
          overthrows all demur; to which the former replies,
          that it really does so, taking the holy Scriptures for
          the church-book.

          “To observe upon the utter confusion of all time and
          place, of all customs and manners, in this drama,
          would be superfluous; they must be obvious to the most
          careless observer.”—GIFFORD.

# 74:

          _woman_] Old ed. “women.”

# 75:

          _law_] Old ed. “lawfull.”

# 76:

          _likelihood_] Old ed. “livelihood.”

# 77:

          _whose_] Old ed. “which.”

# 78:

          _as they may be supposed tedious_] Old ed. “_as_ it
          _may be supposed_ is _tedious_.”

# 79:

          _for the women_] Old ed. “_for_ the which are _the
          women_.”

# 80:

          _past_] Old ed. “to be _past_.”

# 81:

          _they_] Old ed. “to.”

# 82:

          _and not for a full month_, &c.] “The reader will see
          the necessity and the motive of this provision in the
          act towards the conclusion of the play.”—GIFFORD.

# 83:

          “Had acts of parliament, in Massinger’s days, been
          somewhat like what they are in ours, we might not
          unreasonably have supposed that this was wickedly
          meant as a ridicule on them; for a more prolix,
          tautological, confused piece of formality, human wit,
          or rather human dulness, could not easily have
          produced. As it stands in the old copy and in Coxeter,
          it is absolutely incomprehensible.”—_Id._

# 84:

          _do it_] Old ed. “doot.”

# 85:

          _woman_] Old ed. “women.”

# 86:

          _’tis_] Old ed. “his.”

# 87:

          _now_] Old ed. “nor.”

# 88:

            ———— _if this hold, white heads will be cheap, And
          many watchmen’s places will be vacant_;] “The authors
          could not forbear, even at this serious moment, to
          indulge a smile at the venerable guardians of the
          night, who in their time, as well as in ours, seem to
          have been very ancient and quiet.”—GIFFORD.

# 89:

          _sorrow is_] Old ed. “sorrowes.”

# 90:

          _horse_] Old ed. “horseback.”

# 91:

          _where is_] Old ed. “wheres.”

# 92:

          _In’s secure quiet_, &c.] So Gifford. The old ed. has,

              “_In_ his secured _quiet by a villaines hand_
              Am _basely lost in_ my _starrs ignorance_.”

# 93:

          _sir_] Old ed. “sit.”

# 94:

          _weeping_] “This is given by the modern editors as a
          marginal note; but the old copy makes it, and rightly,
          a part of the text.”—GIFFORD.

# 95:

          _to prevent her_] “i. e. to anticipate the period she
          had allotted to life.”—_Id._

# 96:

          _she will_] Old ed. “sheel.”

# 97:

          _there’s_] Old ed. “there is.”

# 98:

          _her_] Old ed. “it.”

# 99:

          _her_] Old ed. “it.”

# 100:

          _thrown_] Old ed. “threw.”

# 101:

          _she will_] Old ed. “sheel.”

# 102:

          _while_] i. e. until.

# 103:

          _Forgetest still_] Old ed. “_Still_ forgets.”

# 104:

          _with_] Old ed. “within.”

# 105:

          _doubled now_] Old ed. “_now doubled_.”

# 106:

          _Cleanthes, never better_] Old ed. “_Never better,
          Cleanthes._”

# 107:

          _strong_] Old ed. “stronger.”

# 108:

          _she is ... of’t_] Old ed. “shees ... of it.”

# 109:

          _allow_] i. e. approve.

# 110:

          _’s_] Old ed. “is.”

# 111:

          _Buried my name in Epire_, &c.] “This is obscure.
          Perhaps Leonides means, that he had so conducted
          himself in his native country (i. e. so raised his
          reputation there), that his memory would always live
          in the recollection of the people, unless he now
          quitted them for a residence elsewhere. The conclusion
          of this speech I do not understand.”—GIFFORD.]

# 112:

          _on us_] Old ed. “ons.”

# 113:

          _with’t_] Old ed. “with it.”

# 114:

          _yet_] Old ed. “yes.”

# 115:

          _there is_] Old ed. “theres.”

# 116:

          _one_] Old ed. “all _one_.”

# 117:

          _at night_] Old ed. “_at night_, my lord.”

# 118:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 119:

          Old ed. “2.”

# 120:

          _act_] Old ed. “_act_, my lord.”

# 121:

          _on_] Old ed. “upon.”

# 122:

          _where_] i. e. whereas.

# 123:

          _Wood_] i. e. mad, raging: so M. Mason reads, for
          “Would” of the old ed. Gifford gives “Worried,” to
          perfect, as he says, the metre: but he forgot (what he
          elsewhere notices) that “aches” was formerly a
          dissyllable, and pronounced _aitches_.

# 124:

          _pan’d hose_] i. e. breeches (generally made full and
          bombasted) having _panes_ or openings in the cloth,
          where other colours were inserted in silk, and drawn
          through.

# 125:

          _bravery_] “i. e. ostentatious finery of
          apparel.”—GIFFORD.

# 126:

          _Push_] This exclamation (which Gifford alters to
          _Pish_) is several times used by Middleton, as well as
          by other authors of his time: so Chapman;

             “And lest some Momus here might now crie _push_,
             Say our pageant is not worth a rush.”
                       _Gentleman Usher_, 1606, sig. C 4.

# 127:

          _And keep a better table than that, I trow._] “This
          wretched fellow is punning upon the word _table_,
          which, as applied to his father, meant a large sheet
          of paper, where precepts for the due regulation of
          life were set down in distinct lines; and as applied
          to himself—that he would keep a better house, i. e.
          live more sumptuously, than his father.”—GIFFORD.

# 128:

          _cheese-trenchers_] “Before the general introduction
          of books, our ancestors were careful to dole out
          instruction in many ways: hangings, pictures,
          _trenchers_, knives, wearing apparel, every thing, in
          a word, that was capable of containing a short
          sentence, was turned to account.... Saltonstall
          observes of one of his characters, that ‘for talke hee
          commonly uses some proverbial verses, gathered perhaps
          from _cheese-trenchers_.’ _Pictures_, by W. S.”—_Id._
          See also my edition of Webster’s _Works_, III. 191,
          and note there.

# 129:

          _Forfeit before_] So Gifford: but I am not quite
          satisfied with his reading. Old ed. “_Before_ surfet.”

# 130:

          _You’ve_] Old ed. “You have.”

# 131:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 132:

          _seven-and-fifty_] “See p. 6.”—GIFFORD.

# 133:

          _Push_] See note, p. 29.

# 134:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “_I_ am.”

# 135:

          _Enter_, &c.] The stage-direction in the old ed. is,
          “_Enter Cleanthes and Hipolita with a hears_.”

# 136:

          _this_] Old ed. “in _this_.”

# 137:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “_I_ have.”

# 138:

          _condition_] “i. e. on condition.”—GIFFORD.

# 139:

          _the duke in sight_] Old ed. “_the_ dim _sight_.”—“The
          variation in the text is from a conjecture of Mr. M.
          Mason. I suppose the manuscript had only the initial
          letter of duke, and the printer not knowing what to
          make of _d. in_ sight, corrected it into _dim sight_.
          These abbreviations are the source of innumerable
          errors.”—_Id._

# 140:

          _Him._] Old ed. “He.”

# 141:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 142:

          _Bailiff._] Old ed. “Bayly.”

# 143:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 144:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 145:

          _doctors a’ the name._ “He alludes to Dr. W. Butler, a
          very celebrated physician of Elizabeth’s days. The
          oddity of his manners, the singularity of his
          practice, and the extraordinary cures which he
          performed, raised many strange opinions of him. ‘He
          never’ (says Dr. Wittie) ‘kept any apprentices for his
          business, nor any maid but a fool, and yet his
          reputation thirty-five years after his death was still
          so great, that many empiricks got credit among the
          vulgar by claiming relation to him, as having served
          him, and learned much from him.’ He died at an
          advanced age in 1618.”—GIFFORD.

# 146:

          _should_] Old ed. “shall.”

# 147:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 148:

          _to let him live still_] Old. ed. “_still to let him
          live_.”

# 149:

          _have_] So Gifford. Old ed. “am,” which perhaps is
          right.

# 150:

          _perfum’d_] So Gifford. Old ed. “perform’d,” which may
          be right, in the sense of drest to perfection.

# 151:

          _we know ... you young_] Old ed. “you _know_ ... your
          _young_.”

# 152:

          _Simonides._] Old ed. “Mr. _Simonides_.”

# 153:

          _We’ve_] Old ed. “we have.”

# 154:

          _I am_] Old ed. “I’me.”

# 155:

          _botcher_] Old ed. “brother.”

# 156:

          _wheezing_] Old ed. “wheening.”

# 157:

          _oft_] Old ed. “often.”

# 158:

          _quited_] i. e. requited.

# 159:

          _For_] Old ed. “After.”

# 160:

          _aches_] See note, p. 28.

# 161:

          _know_] Old ed. “knowes.”

# 162:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 163:

          _despatch’t_] Old ed. “_dispatch_ him.”

# 164:

          _in_] Old ed. “_in_ your.”

# 165:

          _it is_] Old ed. “’tis.”

# 166:

          _deduct it to days_] “A Latinism, _deducere_, bring
          it down, or, reduce it to days. This absurdity of
          consulting the church-book for the age, &c. may be
          kept in countenance by Beaumont and Fletcher, vol.
          6th, p. 248. Indeed there are several passages in
          this play that resemble some in the _Queen of
          Corinth_.”—GIFFORD.

# 167:

          _sexton_] Old ed. “_sexton_ for that.”

# 168:

          _Scirophorion_ ... _Hecatombaion_] Old ed. “Scirophon
          ... Hecatomcaon.”—“Scirophorion, Hecatombaion, _and,
          soon after_, December; what a medley! This miserable
          ostentation of Greek literature is, I believe,
          from the pen of Middleton, who was ‘a piece’ of a
          scholar.”—GIFFORD.

# 169:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothos.”

# 170:

          _here’s a trick_, &c.] “This alludes to those games,
          in which the low cards were thrown out; _coats_ were
          what we call court cards. _The end of serving-men_,
          which occurs in the next speech, is the title of an
          old ballad.”—GIFFORD.

# 171:

          _spoke_] Old ed. “spak.”

# 172:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothos.”

# 173:

          _if you do_] “i. e. if you _fare well_.”—GIFFORD.

# 174:

          _passionately_] “i. e. plaintively,
          sorrowfully.”—_Id._

# 175:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 176:

          _broker_] Old ed. “brother.”

# 177:

          _vow’d servants_] Old ed. “_servants vowd._”

# 178:

          _Nor_] Old ed. “Nay.”

# 179:

          _hour_] Old ed. “_hour_ at least.”

# 180:

          _beguile_] Old ed. “beguild.”

# 181:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 182:

          _fault_] “i. e. misfortune.”—GIFFORD.

# 183:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 184:

          _discover’d_] Old ed. “_discoverd_ gentlemen.”

# 185:

          _grinning_] Old ed. “ginny.”

# 186:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 187:

          _cannot_] Old ed. “can’t.”

# 188:

          _one_] Old ed. “_one_ and.”

# 189:

          _horse-trick_] “Some rough curvetting is here meant,
          but I know not the precise motion. The word occurs in
          a _Woman killed with Kindness_. ‘Though we be but
          country fellows, it may be, in the way of dancing, we
          can do the _horse_-trick as well as the serving-men.’
          A. 1.”—GIFFORD.

# 190:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 191:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 192:

          _trillibubs._] “This seems to be a cant word for any
          thing of a trifling nature.”—GIFFORD.

# 193:

          FIRST COURTIER _dances a galliard_] The stage-
          direction in old ed. is “_A Gailliard Laminiard_.”—“A
          galliard is described by Sir John Davis as a _swift
          and wandering dance, with lofty turns and capriols in
          the air_; and so very proper to prove the strength and
          activity of Lysander. It is still more graphically
          described, as Mr. Gilchrist observes, in Burton’s
          _Anat. of Melancholy_: ‘Let them take their pleasures,
          young men and maides flourishing in their age, fair
          and lovely to behold, well attired and of comely
          carriage, dancing _a Greeke Galliarde, and, as their
          dance required, kept their time, now turning, now
          tracing, now apart, now altogether, now a curtesie,
          then a caper, &c._, that it was a pleasant sight.’
          Fol. 1632.”—GIFFORD.

# 194:

          _go_] Old ed. “ago.”

# 195:

          _vennies_] or _venues_, i. e. assaults, bouts, turns.

# 196:

          _a flap-dragon_] Was a raisin, plum, &c., and
          sometimes even a candle’s end, made to float in a
          shallow dish, or glass, of brandy, or other liquor,
          from which, when set on fire, it was to be snatched by
          the mouth and swallowed. Gallants in former days vied
          with each other in drinking off flap-dragons to the
          healths of their mistresses.

# 197:

          _it is_] Old ed. “’tis.”

# 198:

          _you_] Old ed. “with _you_.”

# 199:

          _vennies_] See note, p. 66.

# 200:

          —— _with a trick_] “Lysander gives them all harsh
          names—here he bestows one on Simonides, which the
          delicacy or fear of the old publisher would not permit
          him to hazard in print: tant mieux.”—GIFFORD.

# 201:

          “This stuff is not worth explaining; but the reader,
          if he has any curiosity on the subject, may amply
          gratify it by a visit to Pantagruel and his companions
          on the Isle Ennasin. Below, there is a miserable
          pun upon _hair_—the _crossing_ of an _hare_ was
          ominous.”—_Id._

# 202:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 203:

          _the scotomy_] Old ed. “scotony.”—“The _scotomy_
          (σκοτωμα) is a dizziness or swimming in the
          head.”—_Id._

# 204:

          _venny_] See note, p. 66.]

# 205:

          _go_] Old ed. “goes.”

# 206:

          _You_] Old ed. “It.”

# 207:

          _are_] Old ed. “_are_ all.”

# 208:

          _back_] Old ed. “black.”

# 209:

          ——_for’t had been safer Now to be mad_, &c.] “_Minus
          est insania turpis._ There are many traits of
          Massinger in this part of the scene.”—GIFFORD.

# 210:

          _has_] i. e. he has—an elliptical expression frequent
          in our early poets.

# 211:

          _thou’rt_] Old ed. “thou art.”

# 212:

          See note, p. 72.

# 213:

          _consort_] i. e. company of musicians.

# 214:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 215:

          _foot_] Old ed. “foole.”

# 216:

          _we have Siren here_ ... _’twas Hiren, the fair
          Greek_] In Shakespeare’s _Henry IV._, Part II. Act ii.
          Sc. 4., Pistol exclaims, “have we not Hiren here?” and
          the same (or nearly the same) words occur in several
          other old plays. They seem to be a quotation from a
          (now-lost) drama by Peele, called _The Turkish Mahomet
          and Hiren the Fair Greek_. See the commentators on the
          passage of Shakespeare just cited, and my Account of
          Peele, &c. p. xxxv., prefixed to his _Works_, sec. ed.

# 217:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 218:

          _She grew longer_, &c.] “This miserable trash, which
          is quite silly enough to be original, has yet the
          merit of being copied from Shakspeare.”—GIFFORD.

# 219:

          _avoirdupois_] Old ed. “haberdepoyse.”

# 220:

          _consort_] i. e. company: see note, p. 75.

# 221:

          _wizards_] Old ed. “vizards.”

# 222:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 223:

          _No_] Old ed. “She;” but compare p. 76.

# 224:

          This stage-direction in old ed. stands thus: “_The
          Dance of old women maskt, then offer to take the men,
          they agree all but Gnothoes: he sits with his Wench
          after they whisper._”

# 225:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 226:

          _a mermaid_] “The mermaids of the writer’s time had
          succeeded to the Syrens of the ancients, and possessed
          all their musical as well as seductive qualities.
          Mermaid also was one of the thousand cant terms which
          served to denote a strumpet; and to this, perhaps,
          Agatha alludes.”—GIFFORD.

# 227:

          _old_] Old ed. “old _old_.”

# 228:

          _thine_] Old ed. “nine.”

# 229:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 230:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 231:

          _loath to depart_] “There was anciently both a tune
          and a dance of this name; to the former of which
          Gnotho alludes.”—GIFFORD.

# 232:

          _bawd does_] Old ed. “bawds doe.”—Rings with deaths’
          heads on them used to be worn by procuresses, probably
          from an affectation of piety: see my ed. of Webster’s
          _Works_, iii. 212. and note there.

# 233:

          _And I’ll bury some money before I die_, &c.]
          “This, as every one knows, was an infallible method
          of causing the person who did it to walk after
          death.”—GIFFORD.

# 234:

          _Though_, &c.] To this line in the old ed. “_Hip._” is
          prefixed.

# 235:

          _’gainst_] Old ed. “against.”

# 236:

          _prove_] Old ed. “proves.”

# 237:

          _make_] Old ed. “makes.”

# 238:

          _How sweetly_, &c.] In the old ed. this speech, as far
          as “senses,” is given to Hippolita, and the rest to
          Cleanthes.

# 239:

          _the chiefest_] Old ed. “_the_ first and _chiefest_.”

# 240:

          _can’t_] Old ed. “cannot.”

# 241:

          _comfort_] “The old copy has _consort_, which induced
          Coxeter to give the speech to Hippolita. I have little
          doubt but that the mistake is in this word, which
          should be _comfort_, as it stands in the text: by this
          term the fond parent frequently addresses his
          children. In the mouth of Leonides, too, it forms a
          natural reply to the question of Cleanthes, who then
          turns to make the same demand of his wife.”—GIFFORD.

# 242:

          _That only_, &c.] This and the next line are
          transposed in the old ed.

# 243:

          _lightness_] Old ed. “lightning.”]

# 244:

          _propension_] Old ed. “proportion.”

# 245:

          _to afford_] Old ed. “t’afford.”

# 246:

          _Has_] i. e. he has. See note, p. 72.

# 247:

          _That cries most_, &c.] “Our old poets abound in
          allusions to this stratagem of the lapwing.”-GIFFORD.

# 248:

          _make_] Old ed. “makes.”

# 249:

          _me_] Old ed. “a _mee_.”

# 250:

          _affliction_] Old ed. “affection.”

# 251:

          _his_] Old ed. “this.”

# 252:

          _comforts_] Old ed. “consorts:” see p. 84, and note.

# 253:

                                            ——_blood_;
                    _The sorrows_, &c.]

          Old ed.

                                       ——“_blood_, to
               _The sorrows that he feels, are our heads_.”

# 254:

          _thee_] Old ed. “him.”

# 255:

          _her_] Old ed. “their.”

# 256:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 257:

          _Clean._] Old ed. “Hip.”

# 258:

          _eleven_] Old ed. “leaven.”

# 259:

          _fellow_] Old ed. “follow.”

# 260:

          _sit_] Old ed. “set.”

# 261:

          _an_] Old ed. “one.”

# 262:

           _vild_] i. e. vile—a form of the word common in our
          early poetry.

# 263:

          _Their fathers_] Old ed. “Her father.”

# 264:

          _Widow_] Old ed. “Widdows.”

# 265:

          _Sim._] So Gifford. The old ed. gives this to Eugenia.

# 266:

          _Ere_] Old ed. “Ever.”

# 267:

          _You_] Old ed. “We.”

# 268:

          _ne’er touch’d by razor_] Old ed. “new _tucht by_
          reason.” The emendation is M. Mason’s.

# 269:

          _To call you judges doth not suit your years,
          Nor heads and beards shew more antiquity_;—] “Mr. M.
             Mason reads,

              _To call you judges doth not suit your years,
              Nor heads; and brains shew more antiquity._

          It is evident that he did not comprehend the sense,
          which, though ill conceived and harshly expressed,
          is,—You have not the years of judges, nor do your
          heads and _beards_ (old copy, _brains_) shew more of
          age.”—GIFFORD.

# 270:

          _beauty serves_] Old ed. “beautifeaus.”

# 271:

          _bold_] Old ed. “of old.”

# 272:

          —— _turn the soul_] “So the old copy: Coxeter and Mr.
          M. Mason read, _turn the_ scale, which has neither the
          spirit nor the sense of the original.”—GIFFORD.

# 273:

          _yourselves_] Old ed. “yourselfe.”

# 274:

          _forward for thee without fee_] So Gifford. Old ed.
          has “_forward fee thee_,” and gives “_without fee_” as
          a stage-direction, in the margin.

# 275:

          _Times of amazement_! _what duty, goodness dwell_—]
          “Mr. M. Mason takes this for a complete sentence, and
          would read, _Where do you goodness dwell?_ In any case
          the alteration would be too violent; but none is
          needed here. Hippolita sees the woman who betrayed her
          approaching, breaks off her intended speech with an
          indignant observation, and hastily retires from the
          court.”—GIFFORD.

# 276:

          _My stomach_ strives _to dinner_.] “This is sense,
          and therefore I have not tampered with it: the
          author probably wrote, _My stomach_ strikes _to
          dinner_.”—_Id._

# 277:

          _Dutch venny_] Compare p. 66, 67. Gifford gives
          “_Dutch_ what-you-call;” and perhaps rightly, as the
          names of the other two “wet vennies” follow.

# 278:

          _pepper’d_] Old ed. “prepard.”

# 279:

          _A Flourish_, &c.] Old ed.

          “Florish.
          _Duk._ A flemish.                     _Enter the Duke._”

# 280:

          FIRST] Old ed. “2.”

# 281:
          EVAN. _Nay, back t’ your seats_] “The old copy reads,
          _Nay_, bathe _your seats_; out of which Mr. M. Mason
          formed _keep_; Davis, _take_; and every one may make
          what he can. I believe the young men were pressing
          forward to receive the duke, and that his exclamation
          was, as above, _Nay_, back t’ _your seats_.”—GIFFORD.
          This line is given in the old ed. to “_2 Court_.”

# 282:
          SECOND COURT. _May’t please_, &c.] Old ed.

     “_Duk._ May’t please your highness.
     _Sim._ ’Tis old Lisander.”

# 283:

          _else_] So Gifford. Old ed. “as are.”

# 284:
          EUG. _Your place above_] Old ed.

          “_Hip._ Your place above—Duke—away to death with him.
                                             _Cleanthes_ Guard.”

          I have followed Gifford in this scene.

# 285:

          _car’d_] Old ed. “guard.” What is now given to
          Lysander forms part of Simonides’s speech in old ed.

# 286:
          EVAN. _Away_, &c.] See note 284 in this page.

# 287:

          _offender_] Old ed. “offenders.”

# 288:

          _order_] Old ed. “orders.”

# 289:

          _swoon_] Old ed. “stand.”

# 290:

          [_spreading_] _palm_] “I have inserted _spreading_,
          not merely on account of its completing the verse, but
          because it contrasts well with _contracted_. Whatever
          the author’s word was, it was shuffled out of its
          place at the press, and appears as a misprint
          (_showdu_) in the succeeding line.”—GIFFORD.

# 291:

          _of_] Old ed. “to.”

# 292:

          _our_] Old ed. “one.”

# 293:

          _And much less mean to entreat it_] “For _mean_ the
          old copy has _shown_, which is pure nonsense: it
          stands, however, in all the editions. I have, I
          believe, recovered the genuine text by adopting
          _mean_, which was superfluously inserted in the line
          immediately below it.”—GIFFORD.

# 294:

          _humour_] Old ed. “honour.”

# 295:

          _My lords, it shall_] “i. e. it shall _be briefly
          questioned_. This would not have deserved a note, had
          not Mr. M. Mason mistaken the meaning, and corrupted
          the text to, _My lords_, I _shall_.”—_Id._

# 296:

          _you_] Old ed. “them.”

# 297:

          _godlike_] Old ed. “_goe like_.”

# 298:

          _We’ve_] Old ed. “We have.”

# 299:

          _we’re_] Old ed. “wee are.”

# 300:

          _It is_] Old ed. “’Tis.”

# 301:

          _a_] Old ed. “him.”

# 302:

          _bad_] Old ed. “a _bad_.”

# 303:

          _you’re_] Old ed. “yeare.”

# 304:

          _’gainst_] Old ed. “against.”

# 305:

          _judge, I desire, then_] Old ed. “_judge then, I
          desire_.”

# 306:

          _This were_, &c.] “i. e. O, that this were, &c. But,
          indeed, this speech is so strangely printed in the
          quarto, that it is almost impossible to guess what the
          writer really meant. The first three lines stand thus:

                CLEAN. _This were the judgment seat, we now
              The heaviest crimes that ever made up
              Unnaturalness in humanity._

          Whether the genuine, or, indeed, any sense be elicited
          by the additions which I have been compelled to make,
          is not mine to say; but certainly some allowance will
          be made for any temperate endeavour to regulate a text
          where the words, in too many instances, appear as if
          they had been shook out of the printer’s boxes by the
          hand of chance.”—GIFFORD.

# 307:

          _like_] Old ed. “lyar.”

# 308:

          _they’re_] Old ed. “y’are.”

# 309:

          _Here_] Old ed. “Where.”

# 310:

          _come you_] Old ed. “_you come_.”

# 311:

          _you are_] Old ed. “y’are.”

# 312:

          _he’s_] Old ed. “he is.”

# 313:
          SIM.] Old ed. “_Clean._”

# 314:

          _pox_] Old ed. “a _pox_.”

# 315:
          CLEAN.] Old ed. “_Sim._”

# 316:
          SIM.] Old ed. “_Clean._”

# 317:

          _vild_] See note, p. 94.

# 318:

          _may challenge them_] Old ed. “my _challenge_ then.”

# 319:
          CREON.] Old ed. “_Cle._”

# 320:
          CREON.] Old ed. “_Cle._”

# 321:

          _place_] Old ed. “places.”

# 322:

          _mature_] Old ed. “nature.”

# 323:
          CLEAN.] What is now assigned to Cleanthes is given to
          First Courtier in the old ed.

# 324:

          _shall_] Old ed. “whom it _shall_.”

# 325:

          [_shall appear before us_] “Whether the words which I
          have inserted convey the author’s meaning, or not, may
          be doubted; but they make some sense of the passage,
          and this is all to which they pretend.”—GIFFORD.

# 326:

          _band_] So Gifford. Old ed. “baud.”—Qy. did the author
          write “_The old_ bald sires _again_?”

# 327:

          _May_] Old ed. “My.”

# 328:

          _crowd on_] i. e. fiddle on. A fiddle is still called
          a _crowd_ in many parts of England.

# 329:

          _hat is_] Old ed. “hats.”

# 330:

          _as he is my sovereign, I do give him two crowns
          for it_, &c.] “Here is some poor pun. A sovereign
          was a gold coin worth _ten_ shillings; or, is the
          wit in some fancied similarity of sound between
          _duke_ and _ducat_ (a piece of the same value as
          the other)?”—GIFFORD.

# 331:

          _you will_] Old ed. “you’l.”

# 332:

          _goes_] Old ed. “_goes_ out.”

# 333:

          _the_] Old ed. “a.”

# 334:

          _Crowd on_] See note, p. 110.

# 335:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 336:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 337:

          _at_] Old ed. “to.”

# 338:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 339:

          _that_] Old ed. “where _that_.”

# 340:

          _trumpet_] Old ed. “trumpets.”

# 341:

          _hop’d it had_] Old ed. “hope t’ _had_.”

# 342:

          _Gnotho_] Old ed. “Gnothoes.”

# 343:

          _This passion has given some satisfaction yet_] “i.e.
          this pathetic exclamation: it is parodied in part from
          _the Spanish Tragedy_, and is, without all question,
          by far the stupidest attempt at wit to which that
          persecuted play ever gave rise. That it afforded _some
          satisfaction_ to Lysander, ought, in courtesy, to be
          attributed to his having more good nature than
          taste.”—GIFFORD.

# 344:

          _All hopes_, &c.] Gifford has given the four first
          lines of this speech as verse, and I follow him. The
          rhymes seem to have been lost in the wretched
          corruption of the text.

# 345:

          _my_] Old ed. “our.”

# 346:

          _but_] Old ed. “fashion, _but_.”

# 347:

          _were_] Old ed. “have.”

# 348:

          _return_] Old ed. “retaine.”

# 349:

          _bind_] Old ed. “bound.”

# 350:

          _regent_] Old ed. “regents.”

# 351:

          _grow_] Old ed. “grew.”

# 352:

          _joy_] Old ed. “joyed.”

# 353:

                _Gentlemen, &c._] The publisher’s address to the readers.

# 354:

                An allusion to the suppression of the theatres by the
                Puritans.

# 355:

                “Huntingdon, the place where Oliver Cromwell was born, and
                resided many years of his life. Some allusion here seems to
                be lost.”—REED.

# 356:

          _Raynulph_] “Raynulph Higden was the compiler of the
          Polychronicon, as far as the year 1357, thirty-first
          of Edward III. It was translated into English by
          Trevisa, and completed and printed by Caxton in folio,
          1482.”—REED.

# 357:

          _agen_] The old spelling of _again_, and necessary
          here for the sake of the rhyme: compare p. 416.

# 358:

          _apaid_] i. e. satisfied, contented.

# 359:

          _Before a Monastery_] The place of action is not
          noted in the old ed., and Middleton seems to have
          troubled himself little about the matter. After some
          hesitation, I have marked the present scene “_Before
          a Monastery_,” on account of what Constantius says
          at p. 131:

                                          “in mind
              I will be always _here_; _here_ let me stay.”

          That the scene cannot be _within_ the monastery, is
          shewn by the entrance of the two Graziers.

# 360:

          _They’re_] Old ed. “They are.”

# 361:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 362:

          _We’re_] Old ed. “we are.”

# 363:

          _Who’s_] Old ed. “Who is.”

# 364:

          _general peace_] Compare p. 127, l. 12.

# 365:

          _acts_] Old ed. “actions:” so afterwards in Act iii.
          Sc. i. the old ed. has “If I ensnare her in an
          _action_ of lust.”

# 366:

          _requite_] Old ed. “require.”

# 367:

          _preas’d_] i. e. pressed. Old ed. “prais’d.” _Prease_
          for _press_ is very common in our early poets.

# 368:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 369:

          _e’er_] Old ed. “ever.”

# 370:

          _’t_] Old ed. “it.”

# 371:

          _remorse_] i. e. pity.

# 372:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 373:

          _thy_] Old ed. “the.”

# 374:

          _we’d_] Old ed. “wee’ld.”

# 375:

          _recover’t_] Old ed. “recovered.”

# 376:

          _like_] i. e. please.

# 377:

          _you’ve_] Old ed. “You have.”

# 378:

          _enter_] Old ed. “enters.”

# 379:

          _passion_] i. e. sorrow.

# 380:

          _you’re_] Old ed. “you are.”

# 381:

          _rushes_] “With which anciently rooms used to be
          strewed.”—REED.

# 382:

          _Byrlady_] i. e. By our lady.

# 383:

          _seems by my flesh_] An allusion to a very gross
          saying, which will be found in Ray’s _Proverbs_, p.
          179, ed. 1737.

# 384:

          _We’re_] Old ed. “We are.”

# 385:

          _nice_] i. e. scrupulous.

# 386:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 387:

          _like_] i. e. please.

# 388:

          _You’ve_] Old ed. “You have.”

# 389:

          _there is_] Old ed. “there’s.”

# 390:

          _That is ... of’t_] Old ed. “that’s ... of it.”

# 391:

          _o’er ... ne’er_] Old ed. “over ... never.”

# 392:
          CAST.] Old ed. “_Const._”

# 393:

          _lamp_] Old ed. “lump.”

# 394:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 395:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 396:

          _they’d_] Old ed. “they’ld.”

# 397:

          _they’re_] Old ed. “they are.”

# 398:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 399:

          _are_] Old ed. “is.”

# 400:

          _We’ve_] Old ed. “we have.”

# 401:

          _You will_] Old ed. “Will you.”

# 402:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 403:

          _You’d_] Old ed. “Youl’d.”

# 404:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 405:

          _of’t_] Old ed. “of it.”

# 406:

          _I’m strong_] Old ed. “I am stronger.”

# 407:

          _And warranted worth lightens your fair aspècts_]
          “Alluding to the story of Pope Gregory’s admiring the
          beauty of the English youths at Rome. Beda, Hist. c.
          i.”—REED. I believe the author has no such allusion.

# 408:

          _Stay_[_s_] Qy. “_stains_;” i. e. brings into
          disgrace, exceeds?—a common use of the word in our
          early writers.

# 409:

          _They’ve_] Old ed. “they have.”

# 410:

          _fame_] Old ed. “same.”

# 411:

          _condition_] i. e. disposition, or (as he has just
          said) humour.

# 412:

          _Why_, &c.] Qy. “Why, _will’t_ not keep a hog?”

# 413:

          _fruitful ... uberous_] Synonymes.

# 414:

          _take you_] Old ed. “you take.”

# 415:

          _’bout_] Old ed. “about.”

# 416:

          no proof in love to indiscretion] i. e. I suppose,—no
          trial compared to that which is occasioned by the
          indiscretion of the object beloved.

# 417:

          _imposterous_] i. e. deceitful, cheating. The word
          occurs in several of our early writers. Dodsley and
          his editors chose to give the line thus:

           “For when th’art known to be a whore, _impostress_.”

# 418:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 419:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 420:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 421:

          _conceit_] i. e. conception, idea.

# 422:

          _love’s_] Old ed. “love is.”

# 423:

          _he’s_] Old ed. “he is.”

# 424:

          _’Gainst_] Old ed. “Against.”

# 425:

          _cast_] i. e. contrived.

# 426:

          _The true man_] i. e. the honest man—an expression
          used in opposition to a thief.

# 427:

          _let_] i. e. hinderance.

# 428:

          _and_] Old ed. “_and_ thy.”

# 429:

          _you’d_] Old ed. “youl’d.”

# 430:

          _with’t_] Old ed. “with it.”

# 431:

          _practice_] i. e. artifice, insidious design.

# 432:

          _act_] Old ed. “action.” See note, p. 129.

# 433:
          VORT.] This speech in the old ed. is given to Horsus.

# 434:

          _ne’er_] Old ed. “never.”

# 435:

          _I’ve ... on’t_] Old ed. “I have ... on it.”

# 436:

          _practice_] See note, p. 160.

# 437:

          _garden-house_] When this play was written, gardens
          with summer-houses in them were very common in the
          suburbs of London. These buildings were often used as
          places of intrigue.

# 438:

          _conceit_] i. e. conceive.

# 439:

          _bestow’t_] Old ed. “bestow it.”

# 440:

          _against the hair_] i. e. against the grain, contrary
          to nature.

# 441:

          _night-rails_] i. e. night-gowns.

# 442:

          _rack_] A friend would read “crack”—unnecessarily, I
          think.

# 443:

          _that’s_] Old ed. “that is.”

# 444:

          _cruelly_] Old ed. “cruelty.”

# 445:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 446:

          _pluck’t_] Old ed. “_pluck_ it.”

# 447:

          _where_] i. e. whereas.

# 448:

          _by’t_] Old ed. “by it.”

# 449:

          _conceit_] i. e. fancy.

# 450:

          _A Chamber in a Castle_ Not in the castle, of which
          Hengist immediately proceeds to speak. As the Barber
          presently says of Simon and Oliver, “here they come
          both in a pelting chafe from the town-house,” the
          scene must be at or near Queenborough.

# 451:

          _ne’er_] Old ed. “never.”

# 452:

          _’gainst_] Old ed. “against.”

# 453:

          _ascends first_] Old ed. “_first ascends_.”

# 454:

          _Here’s no sweet coil._] “It is observed by Dr.
          Warburton (see note to 1st part _Henry_ 4th, A. 5, S.
          3.), that in Shakespeare’s time the negative in common
          speech was used to design, ironically, the excess of a
          thing; and this assertion is fully confirmed by the
          several examples produced by Mr. Steevens in proof of
          it.” REED.

# 455:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 456:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 457:

          _Sir-reverence_] A corruption of _save-reverence_,
          _salvâ reverentiâ_. See Nares in v.

# 458:

          _towards_] i. e. at hand, forthcoming.

# 459:

          _scorn’d the motion_] Here S. P., an annotator in
          Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, wishes unnecessarily to
          read “mention.” Middleton has the same expression
          elsewhere; and so in Beaumont and Fletcher’s _Cupid’s
          Revenge_, act iv. sc. 3.

          “_3 Cit._ You had best
                    Go peach; do, peach!
           _2 Cit._ Peach? _I scorn the motion._”

# 460:

          _callymoocher_] A term of reproach, which I cannot
          explain.

# 461:

          _ale-conner_] “Or ale-taster, an officer appointed in
          every court leet to look to the assize and goodness of
          bread, ale, and beer.” Kersey’s _Dict._—See also
          Robinson’s _Hist. of Tottenh._ p. 241, quoted by Nares
          in v.

# 462:

          _spiny baldrib_] i. e. a thin slender fellow, with
          little flesh on his ribs.

# 463:

          _cittern_] “A lute or _cittern_ formerly used to be
          part of the furniture of a barber’s shop, and, as Sir
          John Hawkins, in his notes on Walton’s _Complete
          Angler_, p. 236, observes, answered the end of a
          newspaper, the now common amusement of waiting
          customers. In an old book of enigmas, to every one of
          which the author has prefixed a wooden cut of the
          subject of the enigma, is a barber, and the cut
          represents a barber’s shop, in which there is one
          person sitting in a chair under the barber’s hands,
          while another, who is waiting for his turn, is playing
          on the lute; and on the side of the shop hangs another
          instrument of the lute or _cittern_ kind.”—REED.

# 464:

          _throughly_] Modernised unnecessarily by Dodsley into
          _thoroughly_.

# 465:

          _sack-buts_] A play on the meaning of the
          word—_musical instruments_, and _buts of sack_.

# 466:

          _Exeunt_, &c.] Old ed. “_Exit cum suis._”

# 467:

          _hear_] Old ed. “_hear_ her.”

# 468:

          _They’ve_] Old ed. “They have.”

# 469:

          _taken_] Old ed. “ta’ne.”

# 470:

          _passion_] i. e. sorrow.

# 471:

          _conceitedly_] i. e. fancifully, ingeniously.

# 472:

          _minded_] i. e. intended.

# 473:

          _Thong-Castle_] “See Lambarde’s Perambulation of Kent,
          1596, p. 195. Jeffrey of Monmouth’s British History,
          B. 6. C. 11.”—REED.

# 474:

          _Lo, I_, &c.] In _Wit Restored_, 1658 (_Facetiæ_, &c.
          vol. i. p. 268. ed. 1817), this speech of Simon is
          printed, with a few very slight variations, under the
          title of _A Prologue to the Mayor of Quinborough_.

# 475:

          _cannot_] _Wit Rest._ “scorne to;” but compare p. 175,
          l. 24.

# 476:

          _riots_] Old ed. “roots.”

# 477:

          _here’s_] Old ed. “there’s.”

# 478:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 479:

          _of’t_] Old ed. “of it.”

# 480:

          _byrlady_] See note, p. 135.

# 481:

          _give_] Old ed. “gives.”

# 482:

          _carp_] Mr. J. P. Collier proposes to read “cup.”

# 483:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 484:

          _we’ve_] Old ed. “we have.”

# 485:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 486:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 487:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 488:

          _mother_] i. e. hysterical passion.

# 489:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 490:

          _ne’er_] Old ed. “never.”

# 491:

          _niceness_] i. e. scrupulousness.

# 492:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 493:

          _Able to_, &c.] Old ed.

               “_Able to_ make _all of our name_ inhumid,”—

          and so the line stands in all the eds. of Dodsley’s
          _Old Plays_.

# 494:

          _e’er_] Old ed. “ever.” The line seems corrupted. Qu.
          “_In this wild tempest_,” &c.?

# 495:

          _raught_] i. e. snatched away, ravished.

# 496:

          _no_] See note 454, p. 169.

# 497:

          _dear_] See notes, vol. iii. p. 307, vol. iv. p. 486:
          here, perhaps, it is equivalent to—excessive.

# 498:

          _to seek in honesty_] i. e. at a loss for, deficient
          in honesty.

# 499:

          _I’d_] Old ed. “I had.”

# 500:

          _Though’t_] Old ed. “_Though_ it.”

# 501:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 502:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 503:

          _hight_] i. e. called.

# 504:

          _decreen_] i. e. decree. An old form, for the sake of
          the rhyme.

# 505:

          _Is’t_] Old ed. “Is it.”

# 506:

          _Nemp your sexes_ “‘The appointment being agreed to on
          both sides, Hengist, with a new design of villany in
          his head, ordered his soldiers to carry, every one of
          them, a long dagger under their garments; and while
          the conference should be held with the Britons, who
          would have no suspicion of them, he would give them
          this word of command, _Nemet oure Saxas_; at which
          moment they were all to be ready to seize boldly every
          one his next man, and with his drawn dagger stab him.
          Accordingly, at the time and place appointed, they all
          met, and began to treat of peace; and when a fit
          opportunity for executing his villany served, Hengist
          cried out, _Nemet oure Saxas_; and the same instant
          seized Vortegirn, and held him by his cloak.’ Jeffrey
          of Monmouth’s British History, translated by Aaron
          Thompson, 1718, 8vo, p. 194.”—REED. _Nemp your sexes_,
          i. e. Nymeð eouer seaxes,—take your daggers, or short
          swords.

# 507:

          _Lie_] Old ed. “Lies.”

# 508:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 509:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 510:

          _by’t_] Old ed. “by it.”

# 511:

           _Methinks_, &c.] “Shakespeare seems to have imitated
          this in the Tempest, A. 3. S. 3.

             ‘Oh, it is monstrous! monstrous!
             Methought, the billows spoke, and told me of it;
             The winds did sing it to me; and the thunder,
             That deep and dreadful organ-pipe, pronounc’d
             The name of Prosper.’”—REED.

          The date of _The Tempest_ must be settled before we
          can determine whether Shakespeare or Middleton was the
          imitator.

# 512:

          _of’t_] Old ed. “of it.”

# 513:

          _Where_] i. e. whereas. Altered by Dodsley and his
          editors to “When.”

# 514:

          _Kirsendom_] A corruption of _Christendom_.

# 515:

          _you’re_] Old ed. “you are.”

# 516:

          _that’s_—_Kent’s_] Old ed. “_that_ is”—“_Kent_ is.”

# 517:

          _Players_] They have, it appears, only “taken the name
          of country comedians to abuse simple people;” but I
          follow the old copy in terming them “Players,” to
          prevent the confusion which would afterwards arise
          from adopting any other appellation.

# 518:

          _The Whirligig_] Not, I apprehend, the comedy called
          _Cupid’s Whirligig, by E. S._, 1607.

# 519:

          _The Wild-goose Chase_] i. e., perhaps, Fletcher’s
          comedy so called, see p. 122.

# 520:

          _Woodcock of our side_] Taylor, the water-poet, in the
          preface to _Sir Gregory Nonsense_, mentions a book so
          called; but perhaps he merely invented the title.—This
          expression was proverbial, and frequently occurs in
          our early writers: _woodcock_ was a cant term for a
          simpleton.

# 521:

          _O, the clowns_, &c.] Nash tells us that, “amongst
          other cholericke wise Justices he was one that, hauing
          a play presented before him and his Township, by
          Tarlton and the rest of his fellows, her Maiesties
          seruants, as they were now entring into their first
          merriment (as they call it), the people began
          exceedingly to laugh, when Tarlton first peept out his
          head.”—_Pierce Pennilesse_, sig. D. 2, ed. 1595. And
          in the Præludium to Goff’s _Careless Shepherdes_,
          1656, Thrift says—

             “I never saw Rheade peeping through the Curtain,
             But ravishing joy enter’d into my heart.” p. 5.

# 522:

          _Twopence_] Old ed. “2d.” Dodsley and his editors,
          “second!!”

# 523:

          _to_] i. e. comparable to.

# 524:

          _on’t; that’s the thing_] Old ed. “_on_ it, _that’s
          the thing_ indeed.”

# 525:

          _Alas_] Old ed. “Las.”

# 526:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 527:

          _by Amsterdam_] “The toleration allowed to all
          religious sects in the United Provinces, on their
          throwing off the Spanish yoke, occasioned numbers of
          dissenters from the established religion of their
          country, to take refuge in different parts of the
          states of Holland. The chief place appears to have
          been Amsterdam, which is mentioned as such in several
          contemporary dramatic writers. See Ben Jonson’s
          Alchymist, and The Fair Maid of the Inn, by Beaumont
          and Fletcher.”—REED.

# 528:

          _The play begins_] Dodsley and his editors print these
          words as a stage-direction, though they are not given
          as such in the old copy. They are evidently the
          exclamation of Simon on hearing the trumpet.

# 529:

          _I’ll stop_, &c.] Old ed. “_I’le hide my ears and stop
          my eyes._”

# 530:

          _golls_] A cant term for hands,—fists, paws.

# 531:

          _swound_] i. e. swoon.

# 532:

          _aqua-vitæ_] A common name for spirits.

# 533:

          _First_] Old ed. “2.”

# 534:

          _towards_] i. e. at hand.

# 535:

          _cut_] i. e. slashed (see note, vol. i. p. 28), with a
          play on the word: “_Cutted_, scolding, brawling,
          quarrelling.” Kersey’s _Dict._

# 536:

          _in Kent, or Kirsendom_] I ought to have noticed an
          earlier allusion (at p. 200) to the proverbial saying,
          “Neither in Kent nor Christendom,” which has been
          variously explained; see Ray’s _Proverbs_, p. 245, ed.
          1768.

# 537:

          _at an exercise_] “Alluding to the week-day sermons
          used by the puritans, which they called _Exercises_.
          S. P.”—_Note in Dodsley’s Old Plays._

# 538:

          _Here’s no abuse_, &c.] See note 454, p. 169.

# 539:

           _fox’d_] i. e. drunk.

# 540:

          _sight’s_] Old ed. “sight is.”

# 541:

          _till’t_] Old ed. “till it.”

# 542:

          _of’t_] Old ed. “of it.”

# 543:

          _Resolv’d_] i. e. convinced, informed.

# 544:

          _waking_] Old ed. “making.”

# 545:

          _where_] i. e. whereas.

# 546:

          _practice_] See note, p. 160.

# 547:

          _of’t_] Old ed. “of it.”

# 548:

          _the prince_] Words which, perhaps, should be thrown
          out.

# 549:

          _I will_] Old ed. “I’le.”

# 550:

          _prevented_] i. e. anticipated.

# 551:

          _And_] i. e. If.

# 552:

          _golls_] See note, p. 206.

# 553:

          _Ninevitical motion_] _Motion_ is a puppet-show; and
          that of _Nineveh_, often mentioned by our old writers,
          appears to have been very popular. “They say, there’s
          a new _motion of the city of Nineveh_, with Jonas and
          the whale, to be seen at Fleet-bridge.”—B. JONSON’s
          _Every Man out of his Humour_, act ii. sc. 1.

# 554:

          _Tamburlain_] A personage whom Marlowe’s tragedy of
          that name had rendered familiar to the audience.

# 555:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 556:

          _sprig of rosemary at his burial, than of a gilded
          bride-branch at mine own wedding_] Rosemary, as being
          an emblem of remembrance, was used both at funerals
          and weddings. Compare _The Pleasant History of John
          Winchcomb, in his younger yeares called Jacke of
          Newberie_: “Then was there a faire bride cup of silver
          and gilt carried before her [the bride], wherein was a
          goodly _braunch of rosemarie gilded very faire_, hung
          about with silken ribonds of all colours: next was
          there a noyse of musitians that played all the way
          before her: after her came all the chiefest maydens of
          the countrie, some bearing great bride cakes, and some
          _garlands of wheate finely gilded_, and so she past
          unto the church.”—Sig. D 3, ed. 1633.

# 557:

          _this in his burgonet_] i. e. this glove in his helmet
          or hat. See stage-direction at the beginning of this
          scene.

# 558:

          _fled_] Old ed. “flee.”

# 559:

          _curb_] A friend would read “curse.”

# 560:

          _measure_] i. e. a grave, stately dance, with slow and
          measured steps.

# 561:

          _likes_] i. e. pleases.

# 562:

          _Lady, bid him_, &c.] Imitated from Shakespeare:

                                 “Let wantons, light of heart,
                Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels.”
                              _Romeo and Juliet_, act. i. sc. 4.

          It is hardly necessary to remark, that before carpets
          were used, the floors were strewed with rushes.

# 563:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 564:

          _likes_] i. e. pleases.

# 565:

          _Willow, willow, willow_] The burden of the song which
          Shakespeare has rendered immortal: see _Othello_, act
          iv. sc. 3.

# 566:

          _besides_] i. e. by.

# 567:

          _laced mutton_] A prostitute—a cant term very common
          in our early dramatists.

# 568:

          _Cornelius’ dry-fats_, &c.] The sweating-tub of
          Cornelius, formerly used for the cure of the venereal
          disease, is often mentioned by our early dramatists:
          but, in the present passage, I suspect there is an
          allusion which had better be left unexplained.

# 569:

          _chitty_] i. e., perhaps, the Italian _città_: but
          Lazarillo afterwards affectedly uses “_chick_” and
          “_chickness_” for _sick_ and _sickness_.

# 570:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 571:

          _chitty_] See note, p. 236.

# 572:

          _Brown-bill_] A sort of pike with a hooked point,
          anciently carried by the English foot-soldiers, and
          afterwards by watchmen.

# 573:

          _curtal_] i. e. dog, or horse: here, I suppose, it has
          the former signification.

# 574:

          _find_] i. e. furnish.

# 575:

          _my full charge_] The constable of the night used
          regularly to give a charge to the watchmen: see
          Shakespeare’s _Much ado about Nothing_, act iii. sc.
          3.

# 576:

          _Mirror of Magistrates_] An allusion to the once-
          popular poetical work so entitled.

# 577:

          _chitty_] See note, p. 236.

# 578:

          _bill-men_] See note, p. 237.

# 579:

          _camooch_] In B. Jonson’s _Every Man out of his
          Humour_, act v. sc. 3, the word _camouccio_ occurs, as
          a term of vituperation; which, says Gifford, “is
          perhaps a corruption of _camoscio, a goat or goat’s
          skin_, and may mean _clown_ or _flat-nose_, or any
          other apposite term which pleases the reader.” So,
          too, in Dekker and Webster’s _Sir T. Wyatt_, 1607,
          (Webster’s _Works_, vol. ii. p. 298), “A Spaniard is a
          _camocho_, or calamanco,” &c.; and Sir T. Brown
          observes (_Vulgar Errors_, p. 351, ed. 1669), “Many
          _Spaniards_ ... which are of the race of Barbary Moors
          ... have not worn out the _camoys nose_ unto this
          day.”

# 580:

          _unpent-house the roof of my carcass_] i. e., in the
          language of ordinary mortals,—take off my hat.

# 581:

          _chitty_] See note, p. 236.

# 582:

          _besonian_] Ital. _besogno_ or _besognoso_—often used
          as a term of reproach by our early writers,—beggar,
          scoundrel.

# 583:

          _bonds and bills_] A play on words: see note, p. 237.

# 584:

          _adelantado_] i. e. the king’s lieutenant of a
          country, or deputy in any important place of charge.
          “Don Diego de fisty Cankcemuscod, who was admirall or
          high _adellantado_ of the whole fleete.”—Taylor the
          water-poet’s _Navy of Land Ships_, p. 79: _Works_, ed.
          1630.

# 585:

          _pitch and pay_] i. e. pay down your money at once.

# 586:

          _Thamer Cham_] i. e. Timur Khaun.

# 587:

          _dried one_] i. e. a dried pilcher, or pilchard.

# 588:

          _rivo_] A Bacchanalian interjection, frequently
          found in our old drama: its etymology has not been
          discovered.

# 589:

          _shift_] viz. trenchers, platters.

# 590:

          _Song_] Old ed. “_Sing. Musicke._”

# 591:

          _poor-john_] A sort of fish (hake, it is said,) dried
          and salted.

# 592:

          _A Street_] Though the servingmen of Camillo (see p.
          247) make their appearance immediately on being called
          for, this scene, whether I have marked it rightly or
          not, is evidently intended to lie in the neighbourhood
          of the house where Violetta dwelt.

# 593:

           _Spanish needle_] The best needles were imported from
          Spain: see Gifford’s note on B. Jonson, _Works_, vol.
          v. p. 12.

# 594:

           _quail-pipe boot_] The following lines from Chaucer’s
          _Rom. of the Rose_ (v. 7212), though relating to a
          much earlier period, may be quoted here:

          “And high shewis knoppid with dagges,
          That _frouncin_ [_i. e._ wrinkle] _like a quale-pipe_,
          Or botis riveling as a gipe.”

# 595:

           _points_] i. e. the tagged laces which fastened the
          _hose_ or breeches to the doublet.

# 596:

          _not entered into any band_] A play on words: _band_
          and _bond_ were formerly used indiscriminately.

# 597:

          _slop_] i. e. breeches.

# 598:

          _other-gates_] i. e. other-ways—other-kind.

# 599:

          _tasting of the cog_] Another pun—_keg_ and _cog_. To
          _cog_ is to lie or wheedle.

# 600:

          _bawdy_] Another—_body_.

# 601:

          _Via_] An exclamation of defiance (from the Italian),
          frequent in our old dramas.

# 602:

          _and if I wist_] i. e. if I supposed.

# 603:

          _by the cross of this Dandyprat_] “King Henry the
          seuenth,” says Camden, “stamped a small coyne called
          _Dandyprats_.”—_Remaines_, p. 173, ed. 1629. Many
          coins were marked with a cross on one side.

# 604:

          _Gentlemen, to the dresser!_] When dinner was ready,
          the cook used to knock on the dresser with his knife,
          as a signal for the servants to carry it into the
          hall. But the words put into the mouth of the
          facetious Doyt appear to have been those usually
          employed by the usher to the attendants on such
          occasions. In the notes to the _Northumberland
          Household Book_, p. 423, are extracts from “Lord
          Fairfax’s Orders for the servants of his household
          [after the civil wars],” where, among “The Usher’s
          Words of Directions,” we find,—“Then he must warn to
          the Dresser, ‘_Gentlemen_ and Yeomen, _to the
          Dresser_.’” Gifford (Massinger’s _Works_, vol. i. p.
          166) has cited from a note of Reed on Dodsley’s _Old
          Plays_ this passage of Lord Fairfax’s “Orders,” &c.,
          as if it contained the _warning_ of the _cook_; and
          Nares, in his _Glossary_ (voc. _Dresser_), has made
          the same mistake.

# 605:

          _brown-bill_] See note, p. 237.

# 606:

          _broken pate—broker_] A play on the word _broker_,
          which meant pander.

# 607:

          _vail_] i. e. lower.

# 608:

          _broking_] i. e. pandering.

# 609:

          _dag_] i. e. pistol.

# 610:

          _Mephostophilis_] The fiend-attendant in Marlowe’s
          well-known tragedy of _Faustus_.

# 611:

          _crackship_] i. e. boyship—little mastership.

# 612:

          _current_] An allusion to the coin called a dandyprat:
          see note, p. 246.

# 613:

          _angel_] i. e. a gold coin, in value about ten
          shillings.

# 614:

          _ventoy_] i. e. fan.

# 615:

          _incony_] i. e. fine, delicate, pretty.

# 616:

          _Fa, la_, &c.] Here (as appears from what follows)
          Imperia moves about, or dances, to the music.

# 617:

          _ingle_] i. e. wheedle, coax.

# 618:

          _&c._] Is sometimes found in passages of our early
          dramatists, and seems to mean that the players might
          make use of any suitable expressions which occurred to
          them.

# 619:

          _Song_, &c.] Old ed. “_Reades. Song._”

# 620:

          _Were neither_, &c.] Old ed.

           “_Were neither lip, nor cheekes currall, nor cherry
                                 eyes._”

           Some of the lines in this miserable effusion seem
          intended to be sung only, not read.

# 621:

          _And_] i. e. if.

# 622:

          _jack_] The figure which struck the bell on the
          outside of the old clocks was called a _jack_.

# 623:

          _these_] Old ed. “this.”

# 624:

          _incontinently_] i. e. immediately.

# 625:

          _counterfeit_] i. e. portrait.

# 626:

          _nail him up_, &c.] As counterfeit money is nailed up.

# 627:

          _Wut_] i. e. Wilt.

# 628:

          _Much!_] An ironical and contemptuous expression, of
          frequent occurrence in the old English drama,
          equivalent, generally, to _little_ or _none_.

# 629:

          _good_] Old ed. “God.”

# 630:

          _aslopen_] i. e. asleep—for the rhyme.

# 631:

          _teston_] Or _tester_ (so called from the head,
          _teste_, stamped on it),—_i. e._ sixpence: it was
          originally of higher value.

# 632:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 633:

          _my roba_] i. e. my wanton. _Buona-roba_ is an Italian
          phrase for a courtesan; “as we say, good stuffe,” &c.
          Florio in v.

# 634:

          _marry, muff_] So Taylor the water-poet;

             “Here’s a sweet deale of scimble scamble stuffe,
             To please my Lady Wagtayle, _marry muffe_.”
                    _A Whore_, p. 111—_Workes_, ed. 1630.

# 635:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 636:

           _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 637:

          _stock_] i. e. stocking.

# 638:

          _hose, pan’d, stuft with hair_] See note, p. 28.

# 639:

          _Abram-colour’d_] So in _Soliman and Perseda_, 1599,
          sig. H 3:

                   “Where is the eldest sonne of Pryam?
                   That _abraham-couloured_ Troion.”

          In Shakespeare’s _Merry Wives of Windsor_, act i.
          sc. 4, Slender is described as having a “_Cain-
          coloured_ beard;” and in our author’s _Chaste Maid
          in Cheapside_, act iii. sc. 2, “_Judas_ with the red
          beard” is mentioned. Theobald, in a note on the
          passage of Shakespeare just quoted, thinks that such
          expressions were suggested by old tapestries and
          pictures. Steevens, _ibid._, is not certain but that
          “_Abraham_” may be a corruption of _auburn_; and in
          _Coriolanus_, act ii. sc. 3, where we now read with
          the fourth folio, “our heads are some brown, some
          black, some _auburn_,” the three earlier folios have
          “_Abram_.”

# 640:

          _When Monsieur Motte lay here ambassador_] Though
          the scene of this play is in Venice, yet “_here_”
          means in England,—during some of the earlier years
          of Elizabeth’s reign.

# 641:

          _against the hair_] See note, p. 163.

# 642:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 643:

          _these_] Old ed. “this.”

# 644:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 645:

          _stone_] Old ed. has “no see,” a misprint. I doubt if
          the word which I have substituted for it be the right
          one.

# 646:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 647:

          _save Hippolito_] Because, probably, Imperia was to be
          his partner. The lavolta was a dance for two persons,
          described by Sir J. Davies, in his _Orchestra_, as “a
          lofty jumping or a leaping round.” See also Douce’s
          _Illust. of Shakspeare_, vol. i. p. 489.

# 648:

          _zanies with torches_] _zanies_ seems here to mean
          nothing more than attendants. In act iii. sc. 1. of
          this drama, when Violetta is told that “Imperia the
          courtesan’s _zany_ hath brought you this letter,” she
          exclaims, “her _groom_ employ’d by Fontinelle!” and in
          Florio’s _New World of Words_, ed. 1611, is “_Zane_,
          the name of John in some parts of Lombardy, but
          commonly used for a silly John, a simple fellow, _a
          seruile drudge_ or foolish clowne in any commedy or
          enterlude play.”—For “_torches_” the old ed. has
          “coaches.” Torch-bearers were the constant attendants
          at masques.

# 649:

          _suckets_] i. e. sweetmeats.

# 650:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 651:

          _bale_] i. e. pair.

# 652:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 653:

          _a’ high lone_] So in Shakespeare’s _Romeo and
          Juliet_, act i. sc. 3, where we now read, “For then
          she could stand _alone_,” the 4to of 1597 has “stand
          _high lone_.” Compare too W. Rowley’s _A Shoomaker a
          Gentleman_, 1638; “The warres has lam’d many of my old
          customers, they cannot go _a hie lone_.” Sig. B 4.

# 654:

          _leesing_] i. e. losing.

# 655:

          LAZARILLO _enters_] His entrance is not marked in the
          old copy, and perhaps the poet intended that he should
          come in with the masquers.

# 656:

          _give fire too suddenly to the Roaring Meg of my
          desires_] A metaphor drawn from the celebrated gun,
          which Churchyard thus mentions in his _Siege of
          Edenbrough Castell_;

          “With thondryng noyes was shot of _roeryng Meg_,
          And throw the thickst she thompt orethawrt the waies,”
             &c.
                                   fol. 94—_Chippes_, ed. 1575.

# 657:

          _Don Diego_] Old ed. “Don Dego,”—seems to have been
          ironically used for _Spaniard_, in consequence of a
          strange indecency committed by a personage of the
          name: see note on act iv. sc. 3, where Lazarillo
          declares that he is “kin to Don Diego.”

# 658:

          _Sanguine-cheeked! dost think their faces have been at
          cutler’s?_] So Beaumont and Fletcher:

          “_Piso._ ————————O’ my life, he looks
                 Of a more rusty, swarth complexion
                 Than an old armory doublet.
          _Lod._ I would send
                 His _face to th’ cutler’s then, and have it
                    sanguin’d_.”
                                              _Captain_, act ii.
                                                 sc. 2.

          “_Sanguine._ The bloud-stone wherewith cutlers do
          sanguine their hilts.”—COTGRAVE’S _Dict._

# 659:

          _Exeunt_, &c.] The old ed. has no stage-direction
          here. The curtains, called _traverses_, sometimes used
          for scenes (see Malone’s _Hist. Acc. of the English
          Stage_, p. 88, ed. Boswell), were drawn, I suppose,
          after this speech of Hippolito.

# 660:

          _with smoke_] There is something abrupt and awkward in
          the conclusion of this scene; and I am inclined to
          believe that part of it has been lost at the press.

# 661:

          _these brims_] Old ed. “this brimmes.”—I suppose
          Hippolito means to say, do not wear your hat so much
          over your face.

# 662:

          _Brest_] A play on words—_breast_.

# 663:

          _bona-roba_] See note, p. 258.

# 664:

          _Incestancy_] i. e. incest. I have not met with the
          word elsewhere.

# 665:

          _fond_] i. e. silly.

# 666:

          _laugh and lie down_] An allusion to the game at cards
          called _Laugh and lay down_.

# 667:

                    ——————_the owl, whose voice Shrieks like the
          belman_] Here, perhaps, Middleton recollected
          _Macbeth_:

           “It was the owl that shriek’d, the fatal belman,
           Which gives the stern’st good night.”—Act ii. sc. 2.

# 668:

          _owes_] i. e. owns.

# 669:

          _a’ life_] i. e. as my life, extremely.

# 670:

          _zany_] See note, p. 261.

# 671:

          _making himself ready_] i. e. dressing himself.

# 672:

          _noddy_] A game on the cards often alluded to by our
          dramatists: how it was played is doubtful.

# 673:

          _lie_] Old ed. “lyes.”

# 674:

          _At ten a’ clock_] Did the author forget that
          Violetta, according to appointment, had, in the
          preceding scene, met Fontinelle _at midnight_?

# 675:

          _Amen_] Old ed. “_Amen_, amen, amen.”

# 676:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 677:

          _table-books_] i. e. memorandum-books.

# 678:

          _these dried stockfishes, that ask so much tawing_] To
          _taw_ is, properly, to dress leather with allum:

          “Yes, if they _taw_ him, as they do whit-leather,
           Upon an iron, or beat him soft like stockfish.”
             BEAUMONT _and_ FLETCHER’s _Captain_, act iii. sc.
                3.

# 679:

          LAZARILLO] Old ed. here (and here only), “Lazarino.”

# 680:

          _skreet_] Query for _discreet_?

# 681:

          _unclipt angels_] A play on words: see note, p. 250.

# 682:

          _chitty-matron_] See note, p. 236.

# 683:

          _chitty_] See note, p. 236.

# 684:

          _capachity_] i. e. capacity: see note, p. 236.

# 685:

          _the a-per-se_] i. e. the chiefest, most excellent:
          see Nares in _Gloss._, and Todd in Johnson’s _Dict._

# 686:

          _ela_] The highest note in the scale of music.

# 687:

          _virginals_] An instrument of the spinnet kind: the
          most correct description of it is in Nares’s _Gloss._

# 688:

          _a garden_] As these words are given in italics, they
          are probably intended as a quotation from the
          _Economical Cornucopia_.

# 689:

          _chitty_] See note, p. 236.

# 690:

          _sops-in-wine_] i. e. pinks: see much concerning the
          name in Nares’s _Gloss._

# 691:

          _in print_] i. e. in exact and perfect manner.

# 692:

          _poking-sticks_] i. e. irons for setting the plaits of
          the ruff.

# 693:

          _chick_] i. e. sick. See note, p. 236.

# 694:

          _where_] i. e. whereas.

# 695:

          _chickness_] i. e. sickness: see note, p. 236.

# 696:

          _chittizens_] See note, p. 236.

# 697:

          _gentlemen_] Old ed. “gentleman.”

# 698:

          _lerry_] i. e. learning, lesson.

# 699:

          _alablaster_] So the word was formerly written,—even
          as late as the time of Milton: see the first editions
          of _Comus_, v. 660, and _Par. Lost_, b. iv. 544.

# 700:

          _nock_] i. e. notch—where the string is fastened.

# 701:

          _guide’s_] Qy. “girl’s?”

# 702:

          _aventure_] i. e. adventure.

# 703:

          _wrack_] i. e. wreck.

# 704:

          _goldfinch_] i. e. a piece of gold, or purse.

# 705:

          _perilous_] i. e. dangerously shrewd: when the word is
          used in this sense by our early dramatists, it is
          generally written _parlous_, as at p. 286.

# 706:

          _lantern and candle-light_] The old ed. gives these
          words in italics, with, perhaps, some allusion which I
          cannot explain. Of Dekker’s tract _O per se O, or a
          new Crier of Lantern and Candle-light_, no edition is
          known anterior to the production of the present drama.

# 707:

          _O sconce, and O sconce!_] i. e. (I suppose) O my
          head, and O my lantern!

# 708:

          _ban_] i. e. curse.

# 709:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 710:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 711:

          _I’m_] Old ed. here, and in next line (where
          “_courtier_” is a trisyllable), “I am.”

# 712:

          _Marry muff_] See note, p. 258.

# 713:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 714:

          _&c._] See note, p. 252.

# 715:

          _go by, old Jeronimo_] A quotation from Kyd’s _Spanish
          Tragedy_, which was written probably about 1590. The
          words are spoken by Hieronimo to himself:

             “_King._ Who is he that interrupts our business?
             _Hier._ Not I: Hieronimo, beware, go by, go by.”

          Dodsley’s _Old Plays_, vol. iii. p. 163. new ed.
          Though this expression, and other lines of _The
          Spanish Tragedy_, are so often ridiculed by
          contemporary writers, the play possesses no ordinary
          merit. Coleridge (see his _Literary Remains_, vol. ii.
          p. 129) thought that some passages of it were written
          by Shakespeare. We know (from Henslowe’s MSS.) that
          Ben Jonson made “adycions” to it in 1601 and 1602.

# 716:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 717:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 718:

          _mum_] Opposite this word the old ed. has a stage-
          direction “_Clap_”—which perhaps means that she is to
          _clap to_ the window.

# 719:

          _knew_] Old ed. “know.”

# 720:

          _parlous_] Old ed. “Paulons:” see note, p. 283.

# 721:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 722:

          _pantaples_] or _pantables_—i. e. a kind of slippers.

# 723:

          _up and down_] The old ed. adds, “_A song presently
          within_,”—a direction intended to warn the singers and
          musicians to be in readiness.

# 724:

          _cry_] Old ed. here and in the next line, “cryes.”

# 725:

          _curtal_] i. e. horse.

# 726:

          _The Spanish pavin_] A grave and stately dance. Sir J.
          Hawkins says,—“Every _pavan_ had its _galliard_, a
          lighter kind of air made out of the former:” see
          Nares’s _Gloss._ in v.

# 727:

          _Satan_] Old ed. “Satin,”—a play on the words _Satan_
          and _satin_.

# 728:

          _Ho_] The word here (as in our very earliest poets) is
          equivalent to “stop.”

# 729:

          _cast_] i. e. vomit.

# 730:

          _I’ve_] Old ed. “I have.”

# 731:

          _gin_] i. e. snare.

# 732:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 733:

          _perilous_] See note, p. 283.

# 734:

          _Cast_] i. e. let me consider.

# 735:

          _sconce_] i. e. lantern.

# 736:

          _bill-men_] See note, p. 237.

# 737:

          _My sconce takes this in snuff_] A poor conceit: to
          _take in snuff_ is, to be angry, to take offence. So
          Shakespeare:

           “You’ll mar the light, by taking it in snuff.”
                         _Love’s Labour’s Lost_, act v. sc. 2.

# 738:

          _when?_] An elliptical expression of impatience, very
          frequent in our old dramatists.

# 739:

          _&c._] See note, p. 252.

# 740:

          _cony-catching_] i. e. cheating, deceiving: the
          _cony_, or rabbit, was reckoned a simple animal. The
          tricks of the _cony-catchers_, or sharpers, with whom
          London used to abound, were described by R. Greene in
          several pamphlets: see the full titles of them in my
          ed. of his _Dram. Works_, vol. i. p. cvi.

# 741:

          _Woodcock, how dost thou, Woodcock?_] The old ed.
          gives these words to Blurt.

# 742:

          _Woodcock, you are of our side_] A proverbial
          expression, which, I suppose, originated in some game:
          see note, p. 203.

# 743:

          _And_] i. e. if.

# 744:

          _my lean Pilcher_] i. e. his page, with an allusion to
          his name: see p. 243 and note.

# 745:

          _I have a poor Spanish suit_, &c.] Lazarillo had
          escaped in his shirt: see p. 286.

# 746:

          _And_] i. e. if.

# 747:

          _slop_] i. e. breeches.

# 748:

          _mandillion_] “Mandiglione, a iacket, a mandillion.”
          Florio’s _New World of Words_, ed. 1611.—Stubbes
          (_apud_ Strutt, _Dress and Habits_, vol. ii. p. 267.)
          says that it covered the whole body down to the
          thighs; and R. Holmes (_ibid._) describes it as a
          loose garment having holes to put the arms through.

# 749:

          _bill-man_] See note, p. 237.

# 750:

          _most thundering_, &c.] This repetition is perhaps an
          error of the old ed.

# 751:

          _Don Diego_] Old ed. here and in the next speech,
          “_Don_ Dego.”

# 752:

          _adelantado_] See note, p. 241.

# 753:

          _Don Diego that was smelt out in Paul’s_] So in
          Heywood’s _Fair Maid of the West_, 1631:

                      ——“now you _Don Diegoes_,
            _You that made Paules to stinke_.”—Part I. p. 51.

          And in Dekker and Webster’s _Sir Thomas Wyatt_, 1607:
          “There came but one _Dondego_ into England, and _he
          made all Paul’s stink again_.” Vol. ii. p. 298 of
          Webster’s _Works_,—where (vol. iv. p. 293.) I have
          given an explanation of these passages, which I am
          unwilling to repeat here.

# 754:

          _bill-men_] See note, p. 237.

# 755:

          _bewrays_] i. e. betrays, discovers.—Lazarillo
          immediately plays on the word,—_beray_, to foul.

# 756:

          _sheaths_] Qy. “sheathed.”

# 757:

          _Via_] See note, p. 245.

# 758:

          _Catso_] Old ed. “At so.” This word, of obscene
          meaning, is borrowed from the Italian. So in _The
          Malcontent_:

                   “_Pietro._ Vengeance and torture!
                    _Mal._ _Catso!_
                    _Pietro._ O revenge!”
                  See my ed. of Webster’s _Works_, vol. iv. p.
                     28.

# 759:

          _Mapew_] Qy. the beginning of some French song—_Mais
          peu_?

# 760:

          _She_] Qy. “Yea?”

# 761:

          _rushes_] See note, p. 234.

# 762:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 763:

          _pickst_] Qy. “prickst?”

# 764:

          _owe_] i. e. own.

# 765:

          _Did Phœbe here_, &c.] Old ed.

                    “_Phœbe here one night did lie._”

# 766:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 767:

          _put up_] i. e. sheathe your sword.

# 768:

          _rushes_] See note, p. 234.

# 769:

          _what motion’s this_] See note, p. 229.

# 770:

          _ventoy_] i. e. fan.

# 771:

          _yellow_] i. e. jealous.

# 772:

          _Much husbands here!_] See note, p. 257. So
          Shakespeare:

          “Is it not past two o’clock? and here _much_ Orlando!”
                                   _As you like it_, act iv. sc.
                                      3.

# 773:

          _gilds_] Old ed. “glides.”

# 774:

          _if my man_, &c.] A metaphor drawn from the game of
          _tables_.

# 775:

          _ingle_] i. e. male favourite.

# 776:

          _Omnes_] The speeches which in the present scene have
          this prefix may be assigned to whatever individuals of
          Camillo’s party the reader pleases to select.

# 777:

          _bills_] See note, p. 237.

# 778:

          _o’er_] Old ed. “over.”

# 779:

          _appose_] i. e. oppose.

# 780:

          _brown bill_] See note, p. 237.

# 781:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 782:

          _I’m sure you’re lord of this misrule_] Old ed. “I am
          _sure_ you are _lord of_ all _this misrule_.” In great
          houses the master of the Christmas sports was called
          _the Lord of Misrule_.

# 783:

          _our_] Old ed. “your.”

# 784:

          _her_] i. e. Imperia’s.

# 785:

          _Violet_] Old ed. “Violetta.”

# 786:

          _lie_] i. e. lay—for the sake of the rhyme.

# 787:

          _daw_] i. e. simpleton.

# 788:

          _I’m_] Old ed. “I am.”

# 789:

          _perilous_] See note, p. 283.

# 790:

          _a fume_] i. e. in smoking tobacco.

# 791:

          _knight of the post_] i. e. cheat, sharper.—This cant
          term means, properly, a hireling evidence; or a person
          hired to give false bail in case of arrest.

# 239.10:
                             --------------

                     _Note omitted at p. 239, l. 10._

          _a precept_ i. e. a justice’s or magistrate’s warrant.

# 792:

          On the death of Falso’s brother, Furtivo passes into
          his service.

# 793:

          _begun_] Qy. “began” for the rhyme.

# 794:

          _Who_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Who’s.”

# 795:

          _owe_] i. e. own.

# 796:

          _prevent_] i. e. anticipate.

# 797:

          _a little too wise_, &c.] So Shakespeare:

            “So wise so young, they say, do ne’er live long.”
                              _Richard III._, act iii. sc. 1.

# 798:

          _sad_] i. e. serious, grave.

# 799:

          _a safer stern_] i. e. (I suppose) a safer course to
          steer. _Stern_ is used by our early writers in the
          sense of steerage, helm.

# 800:

          _curious_] i. e. scrupulous.

# 801:

          _Niece_] i. e. the _niece_ of Justice Falso. Her name
          is not given in any part of the play.

# 802:

          _purchase_] i. e. booty. It was, properly, a cant term
          among thieves for stolen goods.

# 803:

          _queasy_] i. e. squeamish.

# 804:

          _earing_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “earning.”

# 805:

          _Castiza_] Old eds. “_his Lady_.” We learn her name
          from several subsequent parts of the play.

# 806:

          _alas_] Old eds. “’lasse.”

# 807:

          _do it_] Old eds. “doo’t.”

# 808:

          _Servant_] Old eds. “Seruus.”

# 809:

          _It is_] Old eds. “’Tis.”

# 810:

          _Take’t of my truth_, &c.] The metre seems to have
          suffered by corruption of the text.

# 811:

          _singly_] Ed. 1630, “simplie.”

# 812:

          _an inseparable knave_] i. e., I presume, one whose
          knavery cannot be separated from himself.

# 813:

          _vild_] See note, p. 94.

# 814:

          _the forefinger_] i. e. the forefinger pointed at him.

# 815:

          _honourably welcome_] What she has just said explains
          the meaning of these words.

# 816:

          _guess_] A familiar corruption of _guests_, which
          Middleton uses elsewhere. See also Webster’s _Cure for
          a Cuckold_, and my note there, _Works_, vol. iii. p.
          357.

# 817:

          _towed_] Old eds. “toward.”

# 818:

          _a_] So ed. of 1630.—Not in 1st ed.

# 819:

          _I wus_] A vulgar form of _I wis_ (which is the
          reading of ed. 1630), I think, or rather _i-wis_,
          certainly, truly.

# 820:

          _proper_] i. e. handsome.

# 821:

          _sursurrara_] or _sasarara_—a corruption of
          _certiorari_.

# 822:

          _term-trotter_] i. e. a resorter to the capital during
          term-time.

# 823:

          _again_] i. e. against.

# 824:

          _wittol_] i. e. tame cuckold.

# 825:

          _sacred, pure_] In Campbell’s _Spec. of British
          Poets_, vol. iii. p. 134, where this passage is
          quoted, the reading is “wholly _pure_”—an alteration
          by the editor.

# 826:

          _rarely_] i. e. finely, nobly.

# 827:

          _gentlemen_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “gentleman.”

# 828:

          _I’m_] Old eds. “I am.”

# 829:

          _steaks_] Old eds. “steakes.” Some sort of dress
          ornamented with guards or facings, is meant, I
          suppose—if the reading be right.

# 830:

          _I see not a cross yet_] i. e. I see no money yet:
          _vide_ note, p. 246.

# 831:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 833:

          _have_] Old eds. “has.”

# 834:

          _Welcome_, &c.] One of those snatches of blank verse
          (and printed as such in the old eds.) which sometimes
          occur in the midst of prose speeches.

# 835:

          _Knight_] Old eds. “_Fal._”

# 836:

          _a noble touch_] So Shakespeare:

              “Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
              My friends of _noble touch_:”
                                    _Coriol._ act iv. sc. 1.

          which Warburton rightly explains,—of true metal
          unallayed: a metaphor from trying gold on the
          touchstone.

# 837:

          _royals_] Gold pieces current for 15_s._ in
          Middleton’s time.

# 838:

          _It has_] Old eds. “T’as.”

# 839:

          _jets_] i. e. struts.

# 840:

          _so strangely_] i. e. so coyly—with such an appearance
          of coldness. In Johnson’s _Dict._ (even in Todd’s
          ed.), the lines from Shakespeare’s _Two Gent. of
          Verona_, act i. sc. 2.

          “She makes it _strange_; but she would be best pleas’d
          To be so anger’d with another letter,”—

          are absurdly cited for an example of the word
          _strange_ in the sense of _remote_.

# 841:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 842:

          _toward_] i. e. in a state of preparation, at hand.

# 843:

          _passion_] i. e. in a sorrowful tone, with emotion.

# 844:

          _Reverend and honourable Matrimony_, &c.] In a note on
          the Aldine edition of Milton, I have pointed out the
          resemblance between the present passage and that in
          _Par. Lost_, b. iv. 750;

                “Hail, wedded love, mysterious law,” &c.:

          and I take this opportunity of observing, that some
          lines in a play by a dramatist contemporary with
          Middleton seem to have been in Milton’s memory when he
          described the fall of Vulcan;

      “How high I tumbled, who can gesse aright,
      _Falling a summers day from morne to night_.”
          HEYWOOD’s _Brazen Age_, 1613, sig. I.

                              “_from morn
      To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
      A summer’s day_; and with the setting sun,” &c.
                                _Par. Lost_, b. i. 742.

          Homer has merely;

          πᾶν δ’ ἦμαρ φερόμην, ἅμα δ’ ἠελίῳ καταδύντι, κ. τ. λ.
                                                _Il._ I. 592.

# 845:

          _Without thee_] The earlier part of this line seems to
          have dropt out.

# 846:

          _That wedlock’s_, &c.] This line is imperfect; and
          after the next line, something is lost.

# 847:

          _a’m_] i. e. _them_: a’ is often used for _he_ in our
          early dramas.

# 848:

          _clip_] i. e. embrace.

# 849:

          _Indeed all_, &c.] Probably in this and the next
          speech of Fidelio, the metre is lost by the corruption
          of the text.

# 850:

          _Discover quickly_] He means—let us discover ourselves
          quickly.

# 851:

          _know_] Old eds. “knowes.”

# 852:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 853:

          _I’m_] Old eds. “I am.”

# 854:

          _vildly_] i. e. vilely: see note, p. 94.

# 855:

          _contain_] i. e. restrain.

# 856:

          _who_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “whome.”

# 857:

          _ha’_] Old eds. “a _ha_.”

# 858:

          _You have_] Old eds. “Y’aue.”

# 859:

          _apparance_] i. e. appearance.

# 860:

          _Suitor_] This word I have substituted for the
          “_Whin._” of the 1st ed. and the “_Whi._” of the
          second.—Perhaps Tangle ought not to enter till Falso
          says, “What, old signior,” &c.

# 861:

          _good_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “gour.”

# 862:

          _When_] So ed. 1630. First ed. has “Wheu:” but _when_,
          as an expression of impatience, occurs often in our
          early dramatists:

           “_When_, Lucius, _when_? Awake, I say: what, Lucius!
                                   _Enter_ LUCIUS.
            LUC. Call’d you, my lord?”
                      SHAKESPEARE’s _Jul. Cæsar_, act ii. sc. 1.
          See also p. 289 and note.

# 863:

          _prevent_] i. e. anticipate.

# 864:

          _sidemen_] Or _sidesmen_—i. e. assistants to the
          churchwarden.

# 865:

          _scandala magnatum_] This form seems to have been
          common; so Taylor, the water-poet;

              “From _scandala magnatum_ I am cleare.”
          _Farewell to the Tower-bottles_, p. 126—_Workes_, ed.
             1630.

          See also _The Sculler_, p. 29, _ibid._

# 866:

          _a writ of execution, Rapier and Dagger_] These words
          are given to Falso in the old eds.—Ed. 1630 makes sad
          work in the distribution of the speeches here.

# 867:

          _Reinish_] a wretched pun—_Rhenish_.

# 868:

          _Non vacat_, &c.] Ovid. _Trist._ ii. 216.

# 869:

          _Byrlady_] a corruption of _By our Lady_.

# 870:

          _Tan._] So ed. 1630. First ed. “_Fals._”

# 871:

          _sursurraras_] See note, p. 330.

# 872:

          _Longswords_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Longsword.”

# 873:

          _by th’_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “_by th’_ the.”

# 874:

          _he_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “heele.”

# 875:

          _Exeunt_] After this word in the old eds. is the
          following direction, intended for the benefit of the
          performers, not of the reader: “_Toward the close of
          the musick_ [played between the acts] _the Justices
          three men prepare for a robberie_.”

# 876:

          _truss me_] To _truss_ means to tie the points or
          tagged laces by which the hose or breeches was
          attached to the doublet.

# 877:

          _to_] So ed. 1630. Not in First ed.

# 878:

          _venery_] i. e. hunting.

# 879:

          _Latronello_] Old eds. “_Latronello_, and Fuca.”

# 880:

          _under covert barn_] i. e. when he may rob under
          protection. _Barn_ is a familiar corruption of
          _baron_. A wife is said in law to be _under covert
          baron_, as sheltered by marriage under her husband.

# 881:

          _slinking_] Ed. 1630, “stinking.”

# 882:

          _northern dozens_] In _The Rates of the Custome
          House_, &c. 1582, among the cloths enumerated we find

                        “Kerseyes of all sorts
                        _Northen dosens_
                        Bridge Waters” &c. &c.
                                       Sig. G. 2.

          Strutt cites the following act: “Every _Northern
          cloth_ shall be seven quarters of a yard in width,
          from twenty-three to twenty-five yards in length, and
          weigh sixty-six pounds each piece; the half piece of
          each cloth, called _dozens_, shall run from twelve to
          thirteen yards in length, the breadth being the same,
          and shall weigh thirty-six pounds.”—_Dress and
          Habits_, &c. vol. ii. p. 197.

# 883:

          _gear_] i. e. matter.

# 884:

          _true men_] See note, p. 158.

# 885:

          _Was it your loss_, &c.] Old eds.

           “O me, I’m dearly sorry for your chance, was it your
                                  loss?”

          which destroys the metre.

# 886:

          _lord_] Ed. 1630, “lady.”

# 887:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 888:

          _cast_] i. e. vomit.

# 889:

          _Exeunt_] I found it impossible to preserve an
          equality in the length of the acts in this drama. The
          stage-direction in the old copies (see p. 367, note),
          shews plainly that a new act commences with the
          entrance of “_Falso untrussed_;” and it was necessary
          to close that act with the present scene, where the
          Jeweller’s Wife, parting from her paramour at night,
          desires him to come to her “to-morrow” about the same
          hour. The morning of that “to-morrow” has arrived,
          when Phœnix and Proditor enter in the next scene;
          during which, as the reader will observe, time is
          supposed to pass away with astonishing rapidity.

# 890:

          _Phoenix_] How happens Proditor to address the
          pretended assassin by his real name, not only here but
          also at the commencement of act v., where the word,
          forming part of a line, cannot be thrown out as a
          printer’s interpolation?

                 “PROD. Now, _Phœnix_.
                  PHŒ.  Now, my lord.
                  PROD. Let princely blood
                                 Nourish our hopes,” &c.

          That Proditor knew the prince by the name of Phœnix
          appears from act i. sc. 2, where he says,

             “Not many months _Phœnix_ shall keep his life.”

          Perhaps Middleton committed this oversight in the
          haste of composition.

# 891:

          _toy_] i. e. whim, fancy, conceit.

# 892:

          _most_] Old eds. “more.”

# 893:

          _wittol_] See note, p. 331.

# 894:

          _horse and foot_] So in _The Famous Historye of Thomas
          Stukeley_, 1605: “Shee’s mine _horse and foote_.”—Sig.
          B. 2.

# 895:

          _again_] i. e. against.

# 896:

          _sursurraras_] See note, p. 330.

# 897:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 898:

          _do_] Old eds. “do’s.”

# 899:

          _Thou that hast found such sweet pleasure_, &c.] See
          p. 330.]

# 900:

          _hurt_] Old eds. “heart.”

# 901:

          _’Tis coming_, &c.] A speech which seems to have been
          originally all verse.

# 902:

          _carpet_] i. e. table-cover.—Gifford (Ben Jonson’s
          _Works_, vol. v. p. 182) explains it “embroidered
          rug:” but why “_rug_?” the finest Turkey carpets were
          formerly used for covering tables, as many old
          pictures testify.—That _carpet_ also meant sometimes a
          bed-cover appears from the following passage of
          Brathwaite:

          “Downe goes the silken _carpet_ all the while,
          Showing those sheets,” &c.
                        _Strappado for the Diuell_, 1615, p. 43.

# 903:

          _marmoset_] i. e. little monkey.

# 904:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 905:

          _Metreza_] See note, vol. iii. p. 628.

# 906:

          _sixpenny ordinary_] There were ordinaries of all
          prices. Our author notices, in _Father Hubburd’s
          Tales_, a three-half-penny ordinary; in _No Wit, no
          Help like a Woman’s_, a twelvepenny ordinary, act ii.
          sc. 3; in _The Black Book_, an eighteenpenny ordinary;
          in _A Trick to catch the Old One_, a two-shilling
          ordinary, act i. sc. 1; Fletcher, in _The Wild-Goose
          Chase_, a ten-crown ordinary, act i. sc. 1; and our
          author, in _Father Hubburd’s Tales_, mentions a person
          who had spent five pounds at a sitting in an ordinary.

# 907:

          _overflown_] i. e. drunk.—“The young Gentleman is come
          in, Madam, and as you foresaw very high _flowne_, but
          not so drunke as to forget your promise.”—BROME’s _Mad
          Couple well Match’d_, act iv. sc. 2. _Five New
          Playes_, 1653.

# 908:

          _tread_] A friend would read “thread,”—with an
          allusion to the sport called Running at the Ring, when
          the tilter, riding at full speed, endeavoured to
          thrust the point of his lance through, and to bear
          away, the ring, which was suspended at a fixed height.
          But the text is quite right. G. Markham gives
          particular directions how to make a horse _tread the
          ring_—i. e. perform various movements in different
          directions within a ring marked out on a piece of
          ground: see _Cheape and good Husbandry_, &c., p. 18,
          sqq. ed. 1631.

# 909:

          _approve_] i. e. prove.

# 910:

          _revenue_] Phœnix accidentally uses the word by which,
          as the reader will remember, the Knight is accustomed
          to address the Jeweller’s Wife.

# 911:

          _Adieu, farewell_, &c.] The Knight is supposed to
          enter from a tavern, and to be taking leave of the
          companions with whom he had been carousing.

# 912:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 913:

          _rouses_] i. e. bumpers: see Gifford’s note on _The
          Duke of Milan_, Massinger’s _Works_, vol. i. p. 239,
          sec. ed.

# 914:

          _mullwines_] A vulgar corruption of _mulled wines_.

# 915:

          _Argo_] Like the _argal_ of the grave-digger in
          _Hamlet_—a vulgarism for _ergo_.

# 916:

          _two most famous universities, Poultry and Wood-
          street_] i. e. the Counter prisons in the Poultry and
          Wood-street. The same piece of wit occurs in our
          author’s _Michaelmas Term_ and in his _Roaring Girl_.
          So also in Fennor’s _Compter’s Commonwealth_, 1617;
          “But before I was matriculated in one of these city
          universities,” &c. p. 4: and in Jordan’s _Walks of
          Islington and Hogsdon_, &c. 1657, where Wildblood,
          when brought into Wood-street Counter, says, “I have
          commenced in this college before now,” act iv. sc. 1.

# 917:

          _from the Master’s side down to ... the Hole_] The
          best _side_ or department in those prisons was called
          the _Master’s side_; and one of the worst, the _Hole_:
          see Fennor’s _Compter’s Commonwealth_, pp. 4, 5, 11,
          18, 62, 69, 79; and Jordan’s _Walks of Islington and
          Hogsdon_, &c. act iv.

          Gifford (note on B. Jonson’s _Works_, vol. ii. p. 208)
          mentions the _Knights’ ward_ as if it had been the
          best department; but, I believe, it was the second
          best,—after the _Master’s side_.

# 918:

          _toys_] i. e. whimsical, odd things: see note, p. 378.

# 919:

          _Phœnix_] See note, p. 378.

# 920:

          _make a foot-cloth’d posterity_] i. e. make your
          descendants persons of great consequence, riding with
          _foot-cloths_ (long housings) on their horses.

# 921:

          _keep_] Old eds. “keeps.”

# 922:

          -_quicking_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “qucking.”—Query,
          “quickening.”

# 923:

          _At his first rising_, &c.] The words of Proditor to
          Phœnix, see p. 396.

# 924:

          _What’s here_] Old eds. “_Whats heere_ my Lord:” the
          printer having by mistake inserted the exclamation of
          Proditor twice.

# 925:

          _affirm’t_] Old eds. “affirme it.”

# 926:

          _vild_] i. e. vile: see note, p. 94.

# 927:

          _what make I here?_] i. e. what business have I here?

# 928:

          _contained in_] i. e. restrained in, confined to.

# 929:

          _Discovers himself_] This stage-direction, which is
          not in the 1st ed., is given as part of the dialogue
          in ed. 1630,—“to approoue it discouers himselfe.”

# 930:

          _keeps_] i. e. dwells.

# 931:

          _stings_] Old eds. “strings” and “string.”

# 932:

          _this diamond_] Which the Jeweller’s Wife had given to
          Phoenix: see p. 391.

# 933:

          _Torment again!_] Ed. 1630 has “Tormentagent:” qy. did
          the author write “Torment’s agent?” Compare _The Old
          Law_ (p. 31), where Evander calls the executioner
          “Agent for death.”

# 934:

          _wrack_] i. e. wreck.

# 935:

          _mistress_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Master.”

# 936:

          _ne’er_] Old eds. “never.”

# 937:

          _those_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “these.”

# 938:

          _Turks_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Turke.”

# 939:

          _She never saw the dogs and the bears fight_] At
          Paris-Garden, in Southwark. Brathwait, (writing
          several years after this play was produced, though at
          what particular date is uncertain,) mentions it as one
          of the chief “sights” in London.

          “Seven Hils there were in Rome, and so there be
          Seven Sights in New-Troy crave our memorie:
          1 Tombes, 2 Guild-Hall Giants, 3 Stage-plaies, 4
             Bedlam poore,
          5 Ostrich, 6 _Beare-garden_, 7 Lyons in the Towre.”

          _Barnabees Journall_, sig. L. 3. 1st ed. n. d. (_Sec.
          Part_, note.)

# 940:

          _war’s_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “war.”

# 941:

          _least_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “left.”

# 942:

          _fathom_] i. e. comprehension,—compass of thought or
          contrivance.—Old eds. “fadome.”

# 943:

          _advance_] Old eds. “aduanceth.”

# 944:

          _agen_] So the word is generally written by our early
          poets; and where the rhyme requires that spelling, it
          ought not to be modernised.

# 945:

          _neasts_] i. e. nests—for the sake of the rhyme. So
          Brome;

             “That the tipling _feast_,
             With the Doxie in the _neast_,” &c.
               _A Jovial Crew_, 1652 (acted 1641), sig. F. 4.

# 946:

          _The Middle_, &c.] The old eds. do not mark the place
          of action; but the circumstance of the “bills” (see p.
          423) evidently shews that the poet intended this scene
          to lie in the middle aisle of St. Paul’s. That _bills_
          (advertisements) used to be posted up there, and that
          persons of all descriptions were in the habit of
          resorting thither, both for business and amusement,
          might be proved by citations from various writers: it
          is sufficient to refer the reader to Ben Jonson’s
          _Every Man out of his Humour_, act i. sc. 1.

# 947:

          _You’ve_] Old eds. “_You_ have.”

# 948:

          _possess’d_] i. e. persuaded, convinced: so Brome;

          “My lord, I do presume I am unwelcome,
          Because you are _possess’d_ I never lov’d you.”
            _The Queen and Concubine_, p. 38.—_Five New Playes_,
               1659.

# 949:

          _vildly_] i. e. vilely: see note, p. 94.

# 950:

          _Shortyard_, &c.] Old eds. “with his two spirits,
          _Shortyard_,” &c.—It should seem that these assistants
          of Quomodo’s villany were more than mere mortal
          agents: vide the first speech of Shortyard in the 3d
          scene of act iii.

# 951:

          _look sleek_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “looke, _seeke_.”

# 952:

          _Ne_] i. e. Nor—an archaism.

# 953:

          _Observe ... gallantry_] Qy. did the author mean this
          speech to open with two rhyming lines?

# 954:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 955:

          _subtilty’s_] Old eds. “subtiltie is.”

# 956:

          _bills_] i. e. advertisements: see note, p. 418.

# 957:

          _this_] Old eds. “tis.”

# 958:

          _Has forgot_, &c.] The next speech of Rearage
          concludes a couplet, which can only be rendered
          complete by the following awkward arrangement of the
          text;

                 “Has forgot his father’s
                 Name, poor Walter Gruel, that begot him,
                 Fed him, and brought him up.”

          But let me observe, that Middleton, when he introduces
          a couplet, does not always think it necessary that the
          first line should consist of as many feet as the
          second: compare the lines at the end of the fourth act
          of this play;

             “Delay not now; you’ve understood my love;
             I’ve a priest ready; this is the fittest season.
             No eye offends us: let this kiss
             Restore thee to more wealth, me to more bliss.”

          See also _The Phœnix_, p. 351, where my remark (note
          ^{845}) about the dropping out of part of the line was
          inconsiderate.

          Nor is this somewhat slovenly style of writing
          peculiar to our author: in one of Brome’s plays, a
          speech which consists of regular blank verse concludes
          with the following couplet;

          “So, now dye and sinke
          Into thy grave, to rid us of thy stinke.”
            _The Sparagus Garden_, 1640, sig. H. 3. (acted
               1635.)

# 959:

          _respective_] i. e. respectful.

# 960:

          _I’d_] Old eds. “I had.”

# 961:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. here and in the next line but three,
          “I have.”

# 962:

          _agen_] See note, p. 416.

# 963:

          _pains_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “payne.”

# 964:

          _apperil_] i. e. peril: see Gifford’s note—B. Jonson’s
          _Works_, vol. v. p. 137.

# 965:

          _death of sturgeon_] There seems to be some corruption
          in the text here.

# 966:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 967:

          _aloof off_] Lethe again uses this expression, act
          iii. sc. 1, “since only her consent kept _aloof off_,
          what might I think,” &c.

# 968:

          _Some, poor_, &c.] i. e. Would that some poor, &c.

# 969:

          _scurvy murrey kersey_] Equivalent, perhaps, to poor
          piece of stuff.

# 970:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 971:

          _kersened_] A vulgarism for christened.

# 972:

          _disguise_] Old eds. “disquire.”

# 973:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 974:

          _braver_] i. e. more richly clad.

# 975:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 976:

          _Hellgill_] Old eds. “Lethes Pandar:” his name, as we
          find afterwards, is Dick Hellgill.

# 977:

          _thrummed_] Seems here to mean thatched: the father of
          the Country Wench, speaking of her (act ii. sc. 2),
          says,

                                 “O, if she knew
           The dangers that attend on women’s lives,
           She’d rather lodge under a poor _thatch’d roof_” &c.

          _Thrum_ is, properly, the tuft at the end of the warp
          in weaving.

# 978:

          _a loose-bodied gown_] Is frequently mentioned as a
          common dress of courtesans: so Taylor, the water-poet;

              “Her _loose gowne_, for her looser body fit.”
                       _A Whore_, p. 111.—_Workes_, 1630.

# 979:

          _bums_] i. e., perhaps, _bum-rolls_: “The ladies
          also extended their garments from the hips with
          foxes’ tails and _bum-rolls_ [stuffed cushions],”
          &c.—Strutt’s _Dress and Habits_, &c. vol. ii. p.
          259.

# 980:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 981:

          _deny_] i. e. refuse.

# 982:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 983:

          _thing_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “things.”

# 984:

          _most_] i. e. greatest,—thorough.

# 985:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 986:

          _pants_] “Qy. haunts?” says a friend; but I believe
          the text is right: for the sake of the rhyme, _pants_
          is used in the forced sense of—breathes, exists,
          dwells.

# 987:

          _lie_] Old eds. “lyes.”

# 988:

          _An Ordinary_] In Middleton’s days (and, I believe,
          long after,) gambling was carried on at ordinaries.
          The place of action is not marked in the old eds.

# 989:

          _impressure_] Old eds. “impressier.”

# 990:

          _skills_] i. e. signifies.

# 991:

          _angels_] See note, p. 250.

# 992:

          _wears a smock_] Equivalent, I believe, to—is a knave:
          “the answer of a mad fellowe to his mistresse, who
          being called knaue by her, replied that it was not
          possible, for, said he, if you remember yourselfe,
          good mistresse, this is leape yeare, and then, as you
          know well, knaues _weare smockes_.”—_Treatise against
          Jud. Astrol._, &c., by J. Chamber, 1601, p. 113.
          Compare too vol. iii. p. 81.

# 993:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 994:

          _will_] i. e. desire.

# 995:

          _knew_] Old eds. “know.”

# 996:

          _the Standard_] Of the Standard in Cheapside, which
          John Wells, mayor in the year 1430, first “caused to
          be made with a small cistern with fresh water,” &c.,
          an ample account will be found in Stow’s _Survey of
          London_, b. iii. p. 34, ed. 1720.

# 997:

          _Push_] See note, p. 29.

# 998:

          _vild_] i. e. vile: see note, p. 94.

# 999:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1000:

          _Push_] See note, p. 29.

# 1001:

          _inward_] i. e. intimate.

# 1002:

          _beholding_] Is often used for _beholden_ by our early
          writers.

# 1003:

          _slight_] i. e. contrivance, artifice.

# 1004:

          _She’d_] Old eds. “She would.”

# 1005:

          _keeps_] i. e. dwells.

# 1006:

          _fond_] i. e. foolish.

# 1007:

          _Thomasine_] Here, and in a subsequent stage-
          direction, the old eds. designate her “_Quomodoes
          Wife_,” but in all the other stage-directions, and in
          all the prefixes to her speeches, “_Thomasine_.”

# 1008:

          _look_] Old eds. “lookes.”

# 1009:

          _a cast of manchets_] i. e. a couple of small loaves,
          or rolls, of fine white bread. “A _cast_ of hawks” (a
          not unfrequent expression) occurs in our author’s
          _Spanish Gipsy_, act ii., scene 2.

# 1010:

          _a custard_] Appears, from several passages in our old
          writers, to have been a common love-present.

# 1011:

          _aunt_] i. e. procuress—in which sense the word often
          occurs.

# 1012:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1013:

          _sir-reverence_] See note, p. 171.

# 1014:

          _my shop is not altogether so dark_, &c.] See note, p.
          482.

# 1015:

          _cloth_] i. e. hangings.

# 1016:

          _virginals_] See note, p. 278.

# 1017:

          _Retires_] Old eds. “Exit:” but presently, when called
          by Quomodo, he replies, “I’m ne’er out a’ the shop,
          sir.”

# 1018:

          _what lack you_] Was the constant address of
          shopkeepers to customers. In 1628, Alexander Gill was
          brought before the council for saying, among other
          things, that the king was only fit to stand in a shop
          and cry _what do you lack?_

# 1019:

          _inward_] i. e. intimate acquaintance.

# 1020:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1021:

          _bedfellow_] It was formerly common for men (even
          those of the highest rank) to sleep together; and the
          custom was still prevalent in the time of Cromwell:
          see the notes of Steevens and Malone on Shakespeare’s
          _Henry V._ act ii. sc. 2; and Clarendon’s _Hist. of
          the Rebellion_, vol. vii. p. 34, ed. 1826.

# 1022:

          _Gum_] Old eds. here, and afterwards in this scene,
          “Goome:” but see p. 437.

# 1023:

          _walk_] i. e. depart.

# 1024:

          _Brainford_] A common corruption of Brentford.

# 1025:

          _take up a commodity of cloth_] Many passages in our
          early writers might be cited to shew how common
          a custom it was for needy gallants to take up
          _commodities_, i. e. wares which they were to convert
          into ready money. Brown paper (which Quomodo presently
          mentions,) was an article frequently taken up; see
          Steevens’s note on Shakespeare’s _Measure for
          Measure_, act iv. sc. 3; and ginger, pins, packthread,
          &c. &c., are also found in the strange list of
          _commodities_.

# 1026:

          _grow diseased_] i. e. become uneasy.

# 1027:

          _i-wis_] i. e. certainly, truly. There can be no doubt
          that the word is an adverb.

# 1028:

          _foot-cloths_] See note, p. 396.

# 1029:

          _take me with you_] i. e. understand me fully.

# 1030:

          _where_] i. e. whereas.

# 1031:

          _brown paper_] See note, p. 450.

# 1032:

          _as late our graceless dames_] The allusion here is
          probably to the execution of Sir Everard Digby, who,
          for his share in the gunpowder plot, was drawn,
          hanged, and quartered, at the west end of St. Paul’s
          Church, 30th January, 1606: see Stow’s _Annales_, p.
          882, ed. 1631.

# 1033:

          _wale_] i. e. texture; properly, the ridge of threads.

# 1034:

          _quo’_] i. e. quoth.

# 1035:

          _wold_] Old eds. “wilde.”

# 1036:

          _bedfellow’s_] See note, p. 448.

# 1037:

          _price_] Qy. “piece:” see p. 452.

# 1038:

          _Push_] See note, p. 29.

# 1039:

          _logs yet to keep Christmas with_] The bringing in and
          burning of the log, a huge piece of fire-wood, was (at
          least in the country) an important ceremony on
          Christmas eve. It was lighted with a piece of the last
          year’s brand: see the poem entitled _Ceremonies for
          Christmasse_ in Herrick’s _Hesperides_, p. 309, ed.
          1648.

# 1040:

          _Poultry and Wood-street_] See note, p. 392.

# 1041:

          _before_] Old eds. “_with the cloath_:” but see his
          first speech as Idem, p. 460.

# 1042:

          _he_] i. e. Quomodo: so ed. 1630. First ed. “we.”

# 1043:

          _a proper springall_] i. e. a handsome youth. Old eds.
          “_a proper_, springfull.”

# 1044:

          _What do ye lack_] See note, p. 447.

# 1045:

          _he_] i. e. he who.

# 1046:

          To her speeches in this scene, and in all the
          subsequent scenes where she appears, is prefixed
          “_Curt._” i. e. courtesan; and in the stage-directions
          after this scene, she is called “_Courtesan_” or
          “_Harlot_.”

# 1047:

          _the tailor points it_] When this play was written,
          women’s gowns were usually made by men.

# 1048:

          _tirewoman_] i. e. cap-maker, milliner.

# 1049:

          _Hellgill’s Servant_] Old eds. “One.”

# 1050:

          _toy_] See note, p. 378.

# 1051:

          _Fath._] Old eds. “Sho.”

# 1052:

          _risse_] i. e. risen.—Ed. 1630, “rissen:” but the
          other form frequently occurs.

# 1053:

          _and_] Old eds. “_and_ a.”

# 1054:

          _Clubs, clubs_] Was the cry which called forth the
          London apprentices when any fray arose.

# 1055:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1056:

          _Byrlady_] See note, p. 365.

# 1057:

          _mother_] See note, p. 186.

# 1058:

          _aloof off_] See note, p. 427.

# 1059:

          _merely_] i. e. absolutely.

# 1060:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1061:

          _cast of manchets_, &c.] See notes, p. 444.

# 1062:

          _aunt_] See note, p. 444.

# 1063:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1064:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1065:

          _banes_] i. e. bans.

             “Whenere my heart Love’s warmth but entertaines,
             O Frost! O Snow! O Haile forbid the _Banes_.”
                 HERRICK’s _Hesperides_, p. 42. ed. 1648.

# 1066:

          _likes_] i. e. pleases.

# 1067:

          _in Paul’s_] See note, p. 418.

# 1068:

          _spirits_] See note, p. 421.

# 1069:

          _a warning-piece_] So old eds.: but qy. “a warning:
          peace!”

# 1070:

          _know_] So ed. 1630.—First ed. “knew.”

# 1071:

          _knew_] Old eds. “know.”

# 1072:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1073:

          _lecher_] Old eds. “leather.”

# 1074:

          _a_] So ed. 1630. Not in first ed.

# 1075:

          _come_] Old eds. “comes.”

# 1077:

          _proceeded in both the counters_] See note, p. 392.

# 1078:

          _bachelors_] So ed. 1630.—First ed. “batchler.”

# 1079:

          _Much_] See note, p. 257.

# 1080:

          _Fal._] Qy. _Easy_?

# 1081:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1082:

          _Easy_] Qy. _Fal._?

# 1083:

          _bring_] So ed. 1630.—First ed. “ring.”

# 1084:

          _gossip_] i. e. sponsor.

# 1085:

          _bands_] Old eds. “bonds:” the words were formerly
          used indiscriminately: see note, p. 245.

# 1086:

          _Byrlady_] See note, p. 365.

# 1087:

          _owe_] i. e. own.

# 1088:

          _a dark shop’s good for somewhat_] The city tradesmen
          were frequently twitted about the darkness of their
          shops. “What should the city do with honesty?... Why
          are your wares gumm’d; _your shops dark_,” &c.—BROME’s
          _City Wit_, act i. sc. 1. (_Five New Playes_, 1653.)

# 1089:

          _recullisance_] i. e. (I suppose) recognisance:
          _cullisen_ frequently occurs as a corruption of
          _cognisance_: see Gifford’s note on B. Jonson’s
          _Works_, vol. ii. p. 36.

# 1090:

          _blue beadles_] The dress formerly worn by beadles was
          blue: so Taylor, the water-poet;

            “The very _blue-coate Beadles_ get their trash
            By whips and rods, and the fine firking lash.”
                 _Anagrams and Satyrs_, p. 254—_Workes_, 1630.

# 1091:

          _as before_] See p. 481.

# 1092:

          _bedfellow_] See note, p. 448.

# 1093:

          _disguised as before_] See p. 481.—Old eds. “_his
          disguised spirits_.” see note, p. 421.

# 1094:

          _i-wis_] See note, p. 451.

# 1095:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1096:

          _a bow wide_] A term in archery—when the arrow flew a
          bow-length wide (on one side or other) of the mark.

# 1097:

          _let_] i. e. hinderance.

# 1098:

          _vild_] See note, p. 94.

# 1099:

          _spirits_] See note, p. 421.

# 1100:

          _slight_] See note, p. 441.

# 1101:

          _I’ll have ’emlopt_, &c.] Something seems to have
          dropt out before these words.

# 1102:

          _laugh and lie down_] See note, p. 269.

# 1103:

          _toy_] See note, p. 378.

# 1104:

          _beaten_] i. e. trite.

# 1105:

          _take on_] i. e. grieve bitterly.

# 1106:

          _searchers_] i. e. persons appointed officially to
          examine bodies, and report the cause of death.

# 1107:

          _spirits_] See note, p. 421.

# 1108:

          _the great_] i. e. the gross.

# 1109:

          _brave_] i. e. richly dressed.

# 1110:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1111:

          Immediately before these exclamations the old eds.
          have a stage-direction (a warning for the bell-ringer
          and performers to be in readiness), “_A Bell Toales, a
          Confused crie within_.” The bell, of course, does not
          toll till the Boy has been sent to “bid ’em ring out.”

# 1112:

          _reap’t_] Old eds. “reape it.”

# 1113:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1114:

          _mought_] i. e. might.

# 1115:

          _and_] i. e. if.

# 1116:

          _passion_] i. e. sorrow.

# 1117:

          _ringing_] See p. 493.

# 1118:

          _the hospital boys_] Compare Brome: “He is indeed my
          brother, and has been one of the true blew _Boyes of
          the Hospitall; one of the sweet singers to the City
          Funeralls_ with a two penny loafe under his arme.”
          _The City Wit_, act iii. sc. 1.—(_Five New Playes_,
          1653.)

# 1119:

          _censure_] i. e. opinion.

# 1120:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”

# 1121:

          _One_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Ont.”

# 1122:

          _hear_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “feare.”

# 1123:

          _lewd_] i. e. vile, base.

# 1124:

          _A coffin brought in_, &c.] The stage-direction in the
          old eds. is, “_A counterfet Coarse brought in, Tomazin
          and al the mourners equally counterfeit_:” but we find
          there (see next page) a subsequent stage-direction,
          “_Pointing after the_ coffin.”

# 1125:

          _T.’s Moth._] The old eds. (which do not mark her
          entrance) merely prefix “_Moth._” to her speeches.

# 1126:

          _cousin_] i. e. kinsman, relation: in Shakespeare,
          Olivia calls her uncle Toby _cousin_ (_Twelfth
          Night_); and the king says,

                 “But now my _cousin_ Hamlet and my son.”

          I suspect that the word was sometimes used (and
          perhaps is so in the present passage) as a familiar
          address to a person who was not related to the
          speaker.

# 1127:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”—The line is the second of a
          couplet.

# 1128:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”

# 1129:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”

# 1130:

          _No eye offends us: let this kiss_, &c.] An imperfect
          couplet: see note, p. 424.

# 1131:

          _with writings_] The old eds. add, “_having cousned
          Sim Quomodo_.”

# 1132:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. “I have.”

# 1133:

          _Enter Thomasine_, &c.] Old eds. “_Enter Quomodoes
          wife marryed to Easie_:” see note, p. 443.

# 1134:

          _I’ve_] Old eds. here and in the next line but two, “I
          have.”

# 1135:

          _agen_] See note, p. 416.

# 1136:

          _Enter Officers_, &c.] The old eds. have no stage-
          direction here. From the words which presently follow,
          “This is the other,” it seems that Falselight had been
          previously taken into custody; and as they both
          afterwards make their appearance together at the
          justice’s house, I have thought it best to despatch
          them thither in company.

# 1137:

          _lands_] Old eds. “lands.”

# 1138:

          _as before_] See p. 496.

# 1139:

          _Saint Antling’s_] For an account of the church and
          parish so called, see Stow’s _Survey of London_:
          “First you have the fair Parish Church of St.
          Anthonines, in Budge Row (more vulgarly known by the
          name of St. Antlins),” &c.—B. iii. p. 15, &c. ed.
          1720.

# 1140:

          _byrlady_] See note, p. 365.

# 1141:

          _owe_] i. e. own.

# 1142:

          _hither_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “thether.”

# 1143:

          _beset_] i. e. perplexed, embarrassed.

# 1144:

          _Who’s this? ’Tis_] First ed. “_Whose? tis_.” Ed.
          1630, “_Whose? this_.”

# 1145:

          _Had-land_] Is given as two distinct words in the old
          eds.: but compare our author’s _Trick to catch the Old
          One_, act i. sc. 2, where the Host says to Witgood,
          “what’s the news, bully _Had-land_?”

# 1146:

          _Enter Officers_, &c.] The only stage-direction of the
          old eds. in this scene is, “_Enter Lethe with
          Officers, taken with his Harlot_:” that the additions
          which I have made to it are necessary, the following
          scene will shew.

# 1147:

          _’Twixt_] Old eds. “Betwixt.”

# 1148:

          _I’m_] Old eds. “I am.”

# 1149:

          _lewd_] See note, p. 498.

# 1150:

          _does it_] These words ought perhaps to be thrown
          out.—In several parts of this scene the corruption of
          the text has affected the metre.

# 1151:

          _resolve_] i. e. convince, satisfy.

# 1152:

          _Sale._] Old eds. “_Gent._:” for which I have
          substituted _Salewood_, who, as we may gather from act
          iii. sc. 5 (see p. 484), was privy to the design of
          exposing Lethe.

# 1153:

          _vild_] See note, p. 94.

# 1154:

          _lashes_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “lastes.”

# 1155:

          _Sale._] See note, p. 510.

# 1156:

          _His own mother_, &c.] Before this speech something
          seems wanting.

# 1157:

          _Mistress_] So ed. 1630. First ed. “Maister.”

# 1158:

          _again_] i. e. against.

# 1159:

          _defy_] i. e. reject, renounce.

# 1160:

          _Shortyard, we banish thee; it is our pleasure_] Old
          eds. “_Shortyard we banish_, ’tis _our pleasure_.”—I
          may remark that, though the guilty are deservedly
          punished, the judge administers justice somewhat
          arbitrarily in this scene, which is evidently supposed
          to pass in a private dwelling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            Transcriber’s Note

The footnote scheme used lettered references, repeating a-z. On numerous of
occasions, letters were skipped or repeated. The resequencing of notes here
resolves those lapses. Footnotes on occasion are themselves footnoted. For
uniqueness, these are referenced as, for example, ‘35A’.

One unanchored footnote at p. 239 l. 10 was mentioned at the bottom of that
page, glossing the word ‘precept’. That anchor has been added as 239.10.

An errata section was prepated by the Editor and included in this first
volume, which provides additions and corrections to all five volumes in
this set. The relevant sections will be repeated at the end of the
Transcriber’s note of each subsequent volume.

Stage directions, except for entrances, can be:

 in-line
            in the middle of a line and delimited with ‘[ ]’,

 end of line
            right-justified on the same line where there is room, with only
              the leading ‘[’,

 next line
            right-justified on the following line, where there is
              insufficent room, with a hanging indent.

The same convention is followed here. Since this version is wider than the
original, most directions are on the same line as the speech.

Entrances were centered and separated slightly from lines above and below.
This is rendered here as a full blank line.

Other errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have been corrected,
and are noted here. The references are to the page and line in the
original.

  51.8     the end of serving[ /-]men:                    Added.
  65.9     LYS. We’re for you, sir[,/.]                   Replaced.
  343.5    [a/A]nd a loft above                           Replaced.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF THOMAS MIDDLETON: VOLUME 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


